CHAPTER 2 India described
So far as I am able to judge, nothing has been left undone, either by man or Nature, to make India the most extraordinary country that the sun visits on his round. Nothing seems to have been forgotten, nothing overlooked. Always, when you think you have come to the end ofher tremendous specialties and have finished hanging tags upon
her . . . another specialty crops up and another tag is required . . . Perhaps it will be simplest to throw away the tags and generalize her with one all-comprehensive name, as the Land of Wonders. Mark Twain (1897)
1 Marvels and monsters characterised Hellenistic accounts of India, even more so than the earliest Greek accounts, as the first chapter has shown.
Furthermore, it is clear that this marvel-based view of India was typical of Greek descriptions of the ends of the earth generally, and in many respects was not unique to India. We also identified there the doxographic problem:
the phenomenon whereby our knowledge of an earlier text is contingent on
the context and purposes of its preservation within a later (sometimes much
later) text. This is particularly true of Megasthenes, who is usually regarded
as a privileged witness, though his work is transmitted purely in fragments. Whereas, in Chapter 1, the emphasis was on the earlier texts, reconstructed
as plausibly as possible, here it is necessary to concentrate instead on texts of Rome’s early to high imperial periods, many ofwhich preserve those very
fragments. At issue here is the reception of the earlier texts, and their relation
to newly acquired knowledge. Focusing on Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Pliny
the Elder, Arrian and others, we must still be attuned to specific themes of
Indography; but now, in particular, we are in a position to consider the larger contexts within which India featured in Roman thinking. This chapter will thus involve close literary analysis of Indographic passages in the contexts of their reception. The main question here is: what are the literary devices used for describing India and its inhabitants? As we attempt a detailed
Following the Equator: ajourney around the world, 2 vols. (New York: Harper, 1897), vol. II, p. 243. 69
70 Features ofa discourse answer, one issue to be borne continually in mind is that of sources, and
of the ways in which various kinds of topographic information can be
juxtaposed, indeed of the relation between ethnography, topography and
geography within these particular texts. In the larger contexts of Indography, an important distinction should be made at the start, even if it is merely an analytical one. On the one hand
there are works in which specific consideration of India takes centre-stage, even if that is only for a limited part of a work. Thus, for example, both
Strabo and Pliny discuss India at some length in the course of their surveys of world chorography; likewise, in briefer compass, Pomponius Mela. It is in fact Pliny who mentions the younger Seneca’s now lost treatise on India. 2 The significance of this text stretches beyond an Indographic perspective: 3 for one thing, as a fully fledged ethnographic treatise it would have predated
Tacitus’ Germania, the oldest surviving example of this genre in Latin. On the other hand, far outweighing these sources in bulk, are works that merely contain passing references to India, works on any variety of topics. 4 In fact, the digression was the most common literary form for conveying
ethnographic information. 5 This practice was well established by the time of Herodotus, and it was so common by the time of Polybius that he
regards it with critical distance. 6 For current purposes the distinction may
be summed up as follows: either India is described in its own right, or in ways that make it subordinate to the larger concerns of the work. In order
to assess this distinction and its implications, we shall begin by considering some of the authors for whom India features prominently, concentrating on those from the first category.
2 At 6.60 he says, Seneca etiam apud nos temptata Indiae commentatione . . . This and other sources are collected in F. Haase’s edition of Senecas fragments (Leipzig: Teubner, 1903), frr. 9-12. Seneca is also supposed to have written a treatise de situ et sacris Aegyptiorum (Serv. adAen. 6.154).
3 Pace Dieter Flach, ‘Die Germania des Tacitus in ihrem literaturgeschichtlichen Zusammenhang’, in Beitragezum Verstandnis der Germania des Tacitus, ed. Herbert Jankuhn and Dieter Timpe (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1989), pp. 27-58, who follows the dismissive attitude of earlier scholars. Allan A. Lund, ‘ Versuch einer Gesamtinterpretation der Germania des Tacitus’, A/VftWTI.33.3 (1991), pp. 1858-988, esp. i860, stresses the uniqueness of the Germania
.
4 In the collection ofAndr£ and Filliozat, Linde vue de Rome, this latter category predominates by far. The distinction is of course somewhat unfair, given the imbalance between them. Tacitus’ Germania
stands out for its degree of engagement with a foreign people, its social life and mindset.
5 Allan A. Lund, Zum Germanenbild der Romer (Heidelberg: Winter, 1990), p. 19.
6 Note the apologetic tone of 3.57. In this respect compare lug. 17. 1-2. Sallust says that his excursus on African ethnogeography is occasioned by the fact that few know about such a remote place, and
begs his readers indulgence by claiming to be as brief as possible: sed quae loca et nationes ob calorem aut asperitatem, item solitudines minusfrequentata sunt, de iis baudfacile conpertum narrauerim. cetera quam paucissimis absoluam. ‘But, concerning those places and groups that are less often visited on
account of the heat or harsh conditions or desert, I have recounted what I have found out not without
difficulty. As for the rest, let me dispense with them in as few words as possible.’
India described 7i
I. CONTEXTS OF INDOGRAPHY
1. 1. Historiography Within the genre of historiography the Alexander historians bulk large. Partly overlapping with them is the universal history of Diodorus Siculus
(fl. c. 60—30 bc). The forty books of his Bibliotheke took the history of
the Mediterranean world from mythological times down to Caesar.7 Less than half survives in its original form, though further parts were quoted
or paraphrased by later writers. Of his life little is known.8 A major part of Diodorus’ project, being a universal history, is to integrate the narratives of Greek and Roman events. India features mainly in the light of
Alexander’s expedition (2.35—42). Compared with other historians writing about Alexander, Diodorus stands out for the amount of detail he gives, including the fullest surviving Greek account of Indian social divisions. 7 It
is in Diodorus that we find an account of Iambulus’ journey to the Island of the Sun, and thence to the coast of India and to the city of Pataliputra
(Palibothra) on the Ganges. 10 Of the historians that devoted entire works to Alexander, Quintus
Curtius Rufus will occur frequently in the pages that follow. He is of special
interest, not only as someone writing in Latin about Alexander, but also because the highly wrought rhetorical style ofhis work reflects the influence of the schools.11 But none demands as much attention as Arrian (Flavius Arrianus of Nicomedia, d. in or after 170).
11 His monograph on the Alans, an Iranian tribe, is lost, and so are the histories of his native Bithynia and
of the Parthian empire. Arrian’s public career brought him a number of
7 In so far as this is a universal history it is considered also in Chapter 5 below.
8 Sacks, Diodorus Siculus.
9 Note especially the passage attributed by Jacoby to Megasthenes, Chapter 1, section II. 2 above.
10 Diod. 2.55—60, inviting comparison with the brief reference at Lucian s Ver. hist. 1.3. This is likely an abbreviated account, especially since it is in the third person, whereas Iambulus wrote originally
in the first person. See further Diskin Clay and Andrea Purvis, Four island utopias (Newburyport, MA: Focus, 1999), pp. 107-14.
11 The question of his dates is not easily put to rest, though a general consensus has emerged in recent decades: arguments for dating, coming down on the early reign of Claudius, are assessed by John
E. Atkinson, ‘Q. Curtius Rufus’ Historiae Alexandri Magni\ ANRWW.34.4 (1998), 3447-83. The
author was, in all probability, identical with the rhetor mentioned by Suetonius in his Rhet. Even
if there is some argument for a slightly later dating, that would have no discernible impact on the current topic.
12 For a general discussion, see Philip A. Stadter, Aman of Nicomedia (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1980), pp. 115-32. Christian Jacob presents Arrians Alexander as a traveller: ‘Alexandre et la maitrise de l’espace. L’Art du voyage dans 1
’ < <Anabase>> d Arrien , Quademi di
Storia 34 (1991), 5-4°-
72. Features ofa discourse administrative and military posts in various parts of the empire. If it is true
that Trajan’s military programme and his imitation of Alexander gave special significance to any contemporary history of Alexander’s campaigns, 13 it will be important to be alert to possible resonances between Arrian’s and
Trajan’s interests in India. In the Indica, the work sometimes counted the eighth book ofthe Anabasis, Arrian makes good his promise to discuss India’s ethnographic and geo- graphic details in greater detail than the narrative frame of the main work
allowed (5.5. 1-2).'4 In effect, he narrates Nearchus’ return voyage. Only
the first seventeen chapters, strictly speaking, are devoted to the descrip- tion of places and people, but the remaining twenty-six chapters, contin- uing the story of Nearchus’ and Alexander’s campaign, reveal a concern
for topographical detail.' 5 Whereas the Anabasis is written in Attic, the
Indica is written in Ionic, a fact that may express Arrian’s homage to the Herodotean tradition of ethnography, if not to Herodotus himself.'6 By
virtue of its focus on Alexander, the Indica ‘is in no sense an account of
India in Roman times’.'7 Arrian indicates his debt to both Nearchus and Megasthenes, ‘two esteemed authors’ (17.6), to lend authority to his own work by valoris- ing his sources.'8 In the introductory, scientific-geographical chapters of
the Indica it is, however, to Eratosthenes that he appeals (3.1). Arrian has not been to India himself, but his closest point of contact with his material
is his personal knowledge of two tributaries of the Ister, namely the Enus and the Saus: the context is his claim that the Ister and the Nile are comparable with the Indus and the Ganges (4.9).
19 This represents a coming
together of two different sources of authority: those of autopsy and of book
learning. 1. 2. Geography The most substantial topographical work to survive from antiquity is the Geography of Strabo of Amaseia in Galatia (64/63 bc to c. ad 21), which
also contains the lengthiest description of India in any ancient text. For its
13 Albrecht Dihle, Greek and Latin literature ofthe Roman empire (London: Routledge, 1994), p. 243.
14 In so far as this should be regarded as an independent work, it defies the view that Tacitus’ Germania
is the only surviving ancient ethnographic monograph (Lund, Germanenbild, p. 19).
15 Examples are the descriptions of the Ichthyophagi (29) and of Carmania (32).
16 Albin Lesky, A history ofGreek literature (London: Routledge, 1966), p. 848; Stadter, Arrian, p. 116.
17 Stadter, Arrian, p. 117.
18 Yet Arrian’s praise for Megasthenes is elsewhere qualified: he did not see much of India, nonetheless more so than Alexander’s companions did (5.3).
19 Stadter, Arrian, p. 120.
India described 73
author, who was a Stoic by training, geography was a branch of philosophy: he says he aimed to provide a work that would be useful and helpful. Despite
his own sojourn in Rome after 44 bc, he chose to write in Greek rather than Latin: it was not only his native tongue but also the language of
intellectual discourse. Given the global scale of Strabos Geography, it is important to compare that text with contemporary and earlier universal
histories.
20 India makes two major appearances within the seventeen books
of Strabo: first at the beginning of his second book, while he discusses his own methodology and those of his predecessors, including Eratosthenes,
as well as issues involving the size of the earth;
21 and secondly, in the course of a lengthy description of Asia (15. 1. 1—73 C685—720). Asia (books 11—16) comes between Europe (3-10) and Africa (17) as Strabo moves clockwise around the Mediterranean.22 A Latin Strabo of lesser technical sophistication and on a more modest
scale is Pomponius Mela, whose Chorographia comprises three books and
can be dated to the middle of the first century ad.23 The first two books are devoted to parts of the Mediterranean coastline and their adjacent interior;
it is in the third book that we find India, one of the regions overlooked
in this basic schema. Mela diverges from the Greek pattern by proceeding
anti-clockwise from the Straits of Gibraltar, i.e. beginning with Mauretania and Numidia, rather than clockwise, with Spain. 24 India, including the Ganges valley, and its adjoining islands receive brief mention at 3. 61-71. 25 Even making provision for the much smaller scale of Mela s work, it is clear that Asia receives a much lesser degree of coverage in comparison
with Strabo. Mela’s orbis terrarum centers on the Mediterranean world in narrower compass, and so it is not surprising that India receives so little attention. While Mela’s text might seem at first to command little interest,
it was in fact to prove a major conduit ofgeographical information between
antiquity and the western Middle Ages, in view of texts such as Solinus and
Pseudo-Aethicus, considered below.
20
J. M. Alonso-Nunez, ‘An Augustan world history: the Historiae Philippicae of Pompeius Tragus’, G&R 34 (1987), 56-72.
21 He mentions Megasthenes and Deimachus (e.g., 2.1.4 C69), Nearchus and Onesicritus (2.1.9 C70).
22 Katherine Clarke, ‘In search of the author of Strabos Geography , JRS 87 (i997)> 92—no- R- Syme,
Anatolica: studies in Strabo (Oxford: Clarendon, 1995), esp. pp. 256-67.
23 The terminuspost quern of the work is Claudius’ invasion of Britain in ad 43-4 (3*49—53)- h ls quoted
as a source by the elder Pliny, who mentions it several times in the first book of his Natural history.
24 On the Greek pattern visible in Strabo, see Jacoby, FGrH IIC 48-9.
25 On the textual tradition see C. M. Gormley, M. A. Rouse and R. H. Rouse, ‘The medieval circulation of the “de chorographia” of Pomponius Mela’, Medieval Studies 46 (1984), 266—320; and in summary
form R. H. Rouse in Reynolds (ed.), Texts and transmission, pp. 290-2.
74 Features ofa discourse Roughly contemporary with Pomponius Mela is the anonymous Periplus ofthe Erythraean Sea. Written in koine Greek, this work has been dated to the decades ad 40 to 70, making it roughly contemporary with Mela and
Pliny. 26 This is a practical rather than a literary work, offering advice to persons sailing two different routes: from the north eastern Red Sea, round
the Horn of Africa and down the east coast of Africa, to around Zanzibar; and (in greater detail) from the same area, round the Gulf of Aden, across the Arabian Sea and ultimately to the west coast of India. 27 Both of these
routes involved sailing with the monsoon winds. Given the kinds of infor- mation offered in this text, and its style, this appears to have been written by a merchant for others plying the same route. It focuses on the commodities that can be obtained or exchanged at individual ports en route, and advice on sailing and trading conditions at those ports. Indeed, in view both of its content and style, it gives the impression of a conversation overheard; its very survival, via a tenth-century codex now at Heidelberg, seems particularly fortuitous. This work is of central importance
in assessing the exchange of commodities between India and the Roman
world. Claudius Ptolemy lived around ad 90-168, and is today best known
for his astronomical treatise Almagest. His Geography lists more than 8,000
places in Europe, Africa and Asia, according to their latitude and longitude. Ptolemy himself distinguishes his large-scale geography, which is scientific and mathematical, from the more detail-bound chorography, what would
in Latin be called topography (1.1). This was essentially a Greek tradition, ardently pursued in Hellenistic times by Eratosthenes and others, though Pliny and other Latin writers show some awareness of it. Ptolemy’s Geography may be regarded as the culmination of this tradition. 28 As important as Ptolemy’s text was for the long-term history of cartography, it had
little impact on most of the Indographic authors in the period discussed
in this book. Whereas Strabo is dismissive of geographical information
gleaned by traders, Ptolemy makes it clear that both he and his predecessor
26 Lionel Casson (ed.), The Periplus Maris Erythraei (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989),
p. 6.
27 To compare this text with modern printed sources of nautical information shows changes and
varieties of travel, even as it reiterates some of the same routes: in the early days of the Suez Canal,
Britain’s Hydrographic Office published The RedSeapilot (London, 1873), with an equally practical bent. At a time when seaborne commerce relies on different (electronic) media for such information, would-be yachtsmen can still consult the book by Elaine Morgan and Stephen Davies, RedSeapilot: Aden to Cyprus, znd edn (Huntingdon: Imray, 2002).
28 History of cartography, ed. Harley and Woodward, vol. I, pp. 177-200; Wolfgang Hiibner, ‘The
Ptolemaic view of the universe’, GRBS 41 (2000), 59-93.
India described 75 Marinus set great store by the astronomical observations of those plying
the routes of the Erythraean Sea.29 Ptolemy’s India deserves special consideration here, given the importance of his Geography in the history of maps.30 Together with the more
distant east, India occurs in the seventh and last book of the Geography, and is divided into four sections (7.1.1). First, India this side of the Ganges;
second, beyond the Ganges; third, the location of Sinai (whose inhabitants include Aithiopes ichthyphagi,),
31 and whose eastern side borders with unknown lands); and fourth, Taprobane and other islands. The remainder
of the work is devoted to a descriptive summary of world maps, of the
armillary sphere and to a general summary by way of concluding the work
as a whole. It is clear, from any analysis of the geographical co-ordinates
specified in the text, that Ptolemy’s India is not a subcontinent or even
peninsula at all; instead it has a fairly straight coastline running from east to west.32 For Ptolemy, the Ganges represents the key dividing line. The Indus, by contrast, is a valley supporting considerable settlement, rather than a boundary of any kind. Thus the name ‘Indoscythia’ for one of the Indus
areas suggests, in Ptolemy’s view, an area whose cultural traditions combine
those of both the Iranian plateau and the Indus Valley. ‘Gymnosophists’
are mentioned as an ethnic group living toward the eastern side, near the Ganges (7.1. 51). With the partial exception of rivers, which are prominent
in this section of the Geography (e.g., 7.1.29—41), there is nothing that substantively differentiates India from other parts of the world described by
Ptolemy. Within this scheme, India, no less so than the Mediterranean, has
29 Note for example chs. 7 (Diodorus the Samian); 9
(one Diogenes) and 17 (where the traders information about India is balanced against that of local inhabitants); cf. J. Lennart Berggren and
Alexander Jones, Ptolemy’s Geography: an annotated translation ofthe theoretical chapters (Princeton University Press, 2000), p. 25. Contrast Strabo 15. 1.4 C686.
30 Louis Renou (ed.), La Geographie de Ptolemee, L’Inde (VII, 1-4) (Paris: Champion, 1925). Ptolemy’s
description of these parts provided the basis for an extensive work of topography and ethnography: G. E. Gerini, Researches on Ptolemy’s geography ofEastern Asia (Farther India and Indo-Malay Peninsula) (London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1909). Cf. J. R. Sinnatamby, Sri Lanka in Ptolemy’s Geography
(Colombo: n.p., 1968). The Geography is currently in the process of systematic editing: Alfred
Stiickelberger, ‘Ptolemy and the problem of scientific perception of space’, in Space in the Roman
world
,
ed. Talbert and Brodersen, pp. 27-40, at 31.
31 Nicholas Purcell, ‘Eating fish: the paradoxes of seafood’, in Food in antiquity, ed. John Wilkins
et al. (University of Exeter Press, 1995), pp. 132-49, shows that fish-eating can be the hallmark of
barbarian customs. Cf. Gerini, Researches, pp. 255—6, on Ichthyophagoi Aithiopes.
32 This geographical framework, buoyed by a resurgence of interest in Ptolemy, endured until after Vasco da Gama’s expedition of 1498. Ananda Abeydeera, ‘The geographical perceptions of India and
Ceylon in the Periplus Maris Erythraei and in Ptolemy’s Geography Terrae Cognitae 30 (1998), 1-25, reports this anomaly, as well as the absence of any apparent explanation for it. For a reconstruction of Ptolemy’s map on the basis of the co-ordinates he gives, see E. H. Bunbury, A history ofancient
geography, 2nd edn (New York: Dover, 1959), opposite p. 578.
76 Features ofa discourse
definite places that can be mapped by co-ordinates. It abounds with cities
(poleis). What does, however, mark this part of the world as exotic is the nudity of some of its inhabitants, such as the Nangalogai (7.2.18) and the island-dwelling Aginnatai (7.2.26). Ptolemy himself was largely forgotten by the medieval world, both east- ern and western; but later Byzantine manuscripts reveal revived interest in him,33 a revival that spread to Italy with the migration of Byzantine scholars
in the late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.34 In 1406 the Geography was
translated into Latin by Jacopo Angeli da Scarperia, and this brought the work a much wider readership in the west. The rediscovery of Ptolemy was
to have a major impact on cartography and seafaring in the early modern
period, and the history of editions of Ptolemy closely matches the path of
cartographic innovation: for example, the world maps produced by Martin
Waldseemiiller in the early 1500s reflect a dialogue between Ptolemy’s text and the new territorial discoveries.35 One of the critical questions in the
history of cartography was whether the Indian Ocean was an inland sea, in other words, whether it was possible to sail round the Cape of Good
Hope and reach South Asia by that route. This was proven when Vasco da Gama arrived in Goa in 1497, but it took several years for this new infor- mation to be reflected in European maps. The Ptolemaic and the Plinian
traditions emerged very differently in the history of European mapmaking:
the one becoming the basis for maps in the early modern period, the other informing the marvel tradition of the western Middle Ages. 36 Though, as Chapter 1 shows, the story of Dionysus’ invasion of India goes back to Alexander’s expedition,37 it is in the Dionysiaca of Nonnus of
Panopolis (fl. 450-70) that the relevant section is found. Thus it is not till
33 Maximus Planudes in late thirteenth-century Byzantium played a major role in the rediscovery of
Ptolemy: O. A. W. Dilke, ‘Cartography in the Byzantine empire’, in History of cartography, ed. Harley and Woodward, vol. I, pp. 258-75 at 258-59.
34 The most significant manuscript of Ptolemy’s Geography, Urb. gr. 82, travelled to Florence in 1397 with Chrysoloras, its probable owner: see further N. G. Wilson, From Byzantium to Italy: Greek
studies in the Italian Renaissance (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992), p. 9; Grafton, New worlds, p. 49.
35 E.g. O. A. W. Dilke, ‘The culmination of Greek cartography in Ptolemy’, in History ofcartography,
ed. Harley and Woodward, vol. I, pp. 177-200 at 177; Shankar Raman, Framing ‘India the colonial imaginary in early modem culture (Stanford University Press, 2002), esp. pp. ro8-2i. Columbus
possessed a 1478 Latin translation, annotating it in the section on the circumference of the earth: Alfred Stiickelberger, ‘Kolumbus und die antiken Wissenschaften’, Archiv fiir Kulturgeschichtc 69
(1987), 331-40.
36 Abeydeera, ‘Geographical perceptions’, and Tony Campbell, The earliest printed maps, 1472-1400
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987), esp. pp. 122-6.
37 See Chapter 1, section II. 1; and see especially Bosworth, Alexander and the East, pp. 98-132. In addition, according to Pierre Chuvin, Nonnus’ fictional India incorporates elements of the Iranian world of the late second century ad (drawn from a lost source posited by Chuvin): ‘Local traditions
India described 77
the fifth century that the fullest ancient version of the story was recounted,
in books 13-48 of elaborate Greek hexameter. This episode makes up the bulk of the poem, which consists of forty-eight books.38 If Ptolemy’s text had a distinctive history in antiquity and beyond, then
the Christian topography of Cosmas Indicopleustes stands awkwardly, even
eccentrically, in the history of Indography. Dating from the mid-sixth century, this text combines theological and geographical discussions. Cosmas’
eleventh book includes a detailed description of the island of Taprobane, modern Sri Lanka. Of the many works that we know Cosmas to have
written, the Christian topography is the only one to survive in more than
fragments. But in fact the work in its current form does not sit easily between two covers: the longer of the two prologues to survive discusses the contents of the first five books only, and this suggests that the work may
have originally ended at that point. The remaining seven books involve a high degree of repetition, not only between each other but also with the
first six books. The differences between the two surviving prefaces suggest
that the fuller version was the product of a second edition. When we get to the eleventh book, where Sri Lanka and to some extent India and Ethiopia
are discussed at length, the focus of the work has moved considerably from
the theoretical geography of the first few books to topography and natural
history: several animals and plants are recounted in detail. For the present,
it is sufficient to notice the variety within the work, and the possibility that the work in its current form preserves excerpts from Cosmas’ other works, now lost. Cosmas argues for a rectangular universe, in the shape of a vault, and
matching that ofthe Tabernacle. His literal interpretation ofthe scriptures is in keeping with the Nestorian group based at Nisibis.39 This cosmological
vision brought him into conflict with the Aristotelian philosopher John
Philoponus, a clash that emerges most clearly from Philoponus’ subsequent
and classical mythology in the Dionysiaca ’, in Studies in the Dionysiaca ofNonnus, ed. Neil Hopkinson
(Cambridge: Cambridge Philological Society, 1994), pp. 167—76.
38 This number matches the Iliad and Odyssey combined, in keeping with Nonnus’ aim of matching Homer, and even surpassing him in the dignity of his divine (as opposed to human) theme. In
a sketch of Dionysus’ Roman career, Glen Bowersock suggests that by Nonnus’ time Dionysus had ‘become, for pagans and Christians alike, a powerful universalising god of salvation, whose
career brought together, in a common aretalogy the diverse legends and topographies of the far- flung countries where Greek was, however imperfectly, understood’: ‘Dionysus as an epic hero’, in Hopkinson, Studies, pp. 156-66, at 162.
39 Cosmas omits mention of Nestorians when he lists a number of ‘heresies’ (5.178—79). Cf. the
invectives of 6.25-27 and 30-32, which illustrate his tendency to repetition. The Three Chapters controversy brought him into conflict with John Philoponus, the contemporary Christian
Aristotelian.
78 Features ofa discourse De opificio mundi (557-60).40 The use of first-person narrative, in which
the monk Cosmas recalls his past trading ventures, invites comparison with
another work in which authority derives not from books but from personal
experience: the Periplus ofthe Erythraean Sea of some five centuries earlier, though of course that work lacks Cosmas’ religious-philosophical content and its polemical tone.41
I. 3. Natural history Geography was a part of the encyclopaedic project of Pliny the Elder (ad 23/24-79), but merely one among many presenting themselves under
the rubric of Nature (Natura). Despite a busy career in Roman administration and the military, Pliny wrote copiously in various genres, to judge from the biographical information preserved by his adoptive son.
42 Born at Comum to an equestrian family, he held senior posts in various parts of the empire until his death by suffocation during an eruption of Vesuvius. Of
his numerous works, only the encyclopaedic Natural history remains today, having been much read in western Europe of the Middle Ages and beyond. Books 3-6 cover the physical geography of the ‘known world’ ( orbis ter- rarum), area by area;43 within this frame, book 6.21-80 deals with India and
6.81-90 Sri Lanka ( Taprobane). Furthermore, in the seventh, anthropological book, a brief section is devoted to the monstrous creatures and strange
practices of India and Ethiopia (7.21-32). In its brevity, this amounts to
a rapid-fire summary of the detailed descriptions in book 6, though even
here Pliny does not neglect to mention his sources.44 Though it cannot be claimed that India stands at the middle of his writing, it is worth mentioning Aelian here (Claudius Aelianus, c. 172-235),
40 Wanda Wolska, La Topographie chretienne de Cosmas Indicopleustes: theologie et science au VP siecle (Paris: Presses Universitaires, 1962), pp. 147-271, on Cosmas' cosmology.
41 Cosmas will receive further attention in Chapter 3, section I.4 below, in relation to the illustrations he added to the Christian topography.
41 Letters 3.5; 6.16 and 6.20 (the last two being addressed to Tacitus). For a reading of the relevant
letters, stressing the variety ofnarrative frames and readers constructed, see Umberto Eco, ‘A portrait of the Elder as a Young Pliny: how to build fame’, in On signs, ed. Marshall Blonsky (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985).
43 A recent analysis of books 3-6 emphasises its triumphalist politics: Murphy, Pliny the Elder’s Natural
History, pp. 129-64.
44 Among a recent resurgence of interest in Pliny the following also deserve mention: K. G. Sall- mann, Die Geographic des dlteren Plinius in ihrem Verhdltnis zu Varro (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971); G. E. R. Lloyd, Science, folklore and ideology (Cambridge University Press, 1983), esp. pp. 140-52; Andrew Wallace-Hadrill, ‘The elder Pliny and man’s unnatural history’, G & 37 (1990), 80-96; Mary Beagon, Roman nature: the thought ofPliny the Elder (Clarendon, 1992); Sorcha Carey, Pliny’s catalogue ofculture: art and empire in the Natural history (Oxford University Press, 2003).
India described 79
as a reminder that a concern with India in Roman literature is not restricted to geographical and historical sources. Of his two miscellanies, his collec- tion of information about animals, the Trepi £dxov 18i6tt|TOS in seven- teen books, frequently presents India as a place of zoological wonder.45 While curiosities generally interest Aelian, it is striking that many of these
are linked to an Indian location, not unlike the pseudo-Aristotelian De
mirabilibus auscultationibus discussed in Chapter i. Thus the satyr-like crea- tures of 16.21 are specifically linked with the Indian region of Kolounda.
In keeping with the Stoic undercurrent of the work, this is attributed to the wisdom of Nature. Indeed, one of the larger issues to deserve special attention is the extent to which India is invoked as a way of emphasising
the extremes, if not the glories of Nature. Born in Praeneste, Aelian was
a native speaker of Latin; his choice to write in Greek reflects the cachet attached to the Greek language under the influence of the Second Sophistic movement. An extension of this catalogue into the early Middle Ages would reveal a lively and varied tradition of Pliny’s Natural history. This emerges, in
fact, as the text to have an ongoing impact on European perceptions of
India. In terms of the textual transmission of the work, different sections were to have very different fates. 46 The textual reconstruction of Pliny’s Indographic section is hampered by the fact that the prime manuscript for the geographical books breaks off a few chapters short of the section on
India, with the result that editors must rely on the recentiores, which are of
varying quality. 47 But this is only part of the story. Pliny’s text was one of many to undergo
excerption and anthologising in the course ofthe second and third centuries. The process by which anthologies were created out of larger works reflects the creation of canons of text and the resultant desire to codify; it owes
something to the changing technologies of the ancient book, with the
increased use of the parchment codex as opposed to the papyrus roll.
48 Along with Mela, Pliny’s geographical books were to provide the core of
45 The other work, the Varia historia or ‘historical miscellany’, is mentioned below, Chapter 4, section L 5
. 46 L. D. Reynolds, ‘The elder Pliny’, in Texts and transmission, pp. 307-16, esp. 307.
47 See also Jan-Mayhoff(eds.), vi, on the Leidensis Vossianus, known as A. Ofbook 6 it has only 6.41—51. The surviving manuscript is the descendant of a tradition different to and seemingly better than
that circulating in Europe.
48 Arno Borst, Das Buch in der Naturgeschichte. Plinius und seine Leser im Zeitalter des Pergaments
(Heidelberg: Winter, 1984); cf. Colin H. Roberts and T. C. Skeat, The birth ofthe codex (London:
British Academy, 1983), pp. 67-73; L. D. Reynolds and N. G. Wilson (eds.), Scribes and scholars: a
guide to the transmission ofGreek and Latin literature, 3rd edn (Oxford: Clarendon, 1991), pp. 31-6.
8o Features ofa discourse Solinus’ Collectanea. 49 Here the abbreviated version omits Pliny’s source
criticism, however limited that may have been in the first instance.50
It was
with Isidore of Seville’s Etymologiae or Origines that this tradition, which we
might call ‘Plinian’, was transmitted to the Latin Middle Ages, and helped
create a language for the description of distant people. In concrete terms, it provided a framework and even a vocabulary for talking about the ends of
the earth and their inhabitants. The Cosmographia transmitted under the name of Aethicus Ister’ is a prime case of the overlap in Latin topographical
writers after Mela and Pliny. 51 High medieval instances of this tradition are Robert Cricklade and Vincent of Beauvais ( Speculum mundi); 52 even the cartographic tradition seen in the Hereford map ( mappamundi) and the Ebstorf world map reveals a debt to the contents and language of this Plinian tradition. 53 These maps, together with other visual sources of the Middle Ages, offer visual expression of the marvel tradition, as Chapter 3 below will show.
I.4. Romance and mime The Greek novels make considerable use of exotic settings, particularly in the eastern Mediterranean and southwest Asia. So prominent are places such as Ephesus, Babylonia and Ethiopia that earlier scholars posited an
eastern origin of such stories, if not the genre as a whole. 54 While such
an approach is no longer in favour, there remains the undeniable fact of
locale. It is here that India makes an inevitable, if limited appearance, in
several romances. Thus, in the case of Xenophon of Ephesus’ Ephesian
tale, the heroine Anthia is bought by an Indian king and narrowly escapes being shipped to India as a slave. Heliodorus’ Aithiopian tale contains a few references to Indian commodities. Thus there are ‘herbs and roots that
49 The verdict that Solinus was ‘Pliny’s ape’ is overstated, stemming from anachronistic assumptions about authorial originality. At all events, the textual tradition of Solinus shows the degree of overlap with other Latin writers touching on geographic themes, such as Augustine, Isidore and later Aldhelm
and Bede: R. H. Rouse in Texts and transmission
,
ed. L. D. Reynolds, pp. 391-3.
50 See, e.g., Marjorie Chibnall, ‘Pliny’s Natural history and the Middle Ages’, in Empire and aftermath,
ed. T. A. Dorey (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1975), pp. 57-78 at 59.
51 This text, which by its content and phrasing clearly belongs to a line of continuity between Pliny and the late medieval world maps, begins with the well-known threefold division of continents. See Geographi Latini Minores, ed. Alexander Riese (Heilbronn: Henning, 1878), pp. 71-103; also Reeve
in Reynolds, Texts and transmission, pp. 255-6, and Rouse in ibid., p. 290.
52 Chibnall, ‘Pliny’; cf. Reynolds ‘The elder Pliny’, in Texts and transmission, p. 313.
53 It has been suggested that Orosius and Isidore were the key sources for these maps: von den Brincken,
Kartographische Quellen; cf. Lozovsky, The earth, pp. 69-78 on Orosius.
54 Ben Edwin Perry, The ancient romances (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967).
-
India described 81 grow in India, Ethiopia and Egypt’ (2.30.2); ‘precious necklaces and priceless gems from India and Ethiopia’ (8.11.8); and the ‘phoenix that comes
from Ethiopia or India’ (6. 3. 3).
55 In both works, the relevant scenes take
place in the Nile valley: whether the delta or Upper Egypt, this zone link- ing the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean offers considerable narrative
possibilities. The playing out of these possibilities will occupy us in due
course. Atypically of the genre, Longus’ Daphnis and Chloe has a pastoral setting and does not involve long-distance travel. But it does contain a reference
to the triumph of Dionysus, a literary reference to Alexander’s propaganda
concerning India’s past (4.3). In the middle point of the garden (paradeisos
)
that Longus describes at length is a temple and altar dedicated to Dionysus.
Inside the temple are paintings on subjects related to the god: alongside
the conquest of Indians (.Indoi nikomenoi) are scenes such as his birth, the
flaying of Pentheus, and the metamorphosis of the Etruscans. This may be a brief and passing reference to India, but it is significant in
several ways. India occurs at the intersection of the verbal and the visual, as
if Longus is reminding us of the visual appeal of an Indian theme. Indeed,
the scene described is that which survives on sarcophagus reliefs such as that in the Walters Gallery in Baltimore. 56 Prominent in this ekphrasis is the harmonious collaboration of art and nature. Again, India reflects the
glories of nature.
It is generally difficult to attach a date to the ‘famous five’ Greek novels, and the three concerned are no exception: Xenophon of Ephesus’ Ephesian
tale and Longus’ Daphnis and Chloe both tend to be placed in the second
century ad, making them texts of the Second Sophistic, whereas the greater complexity of Heliodorus’ lengthy Aithiopian tale suggests a later date, perhaps between the mid-third and mid-fourth centuries ad.
India features also in a dramatic text (first or second century ad) that survives in a fragmentary state among the Oxyrhynchus papyri. 57 In it, the young Greek woman Charition is held captive by the Indian king. A
priestess of Selene, she takes refuge in the goddess’ shrine. Her brother,
arriving with a party of Greeks, brings about her escape by plying the Indians with unmixed wine. This plot is reminiscent of the Greek novels
55 Philostr. VA 3.49 speaks of India as the origin of the phoenix; more usually its locale is Arabia, e.g. Hdt. 2.73; or Ethiopia, e.g. Ach. Tat. 3.25.
56 Notably the Walters Gallery sarcophagus, described in Chapter 3, section 1 . 2 below.
57 Charition Liberata (P. Oxy. 413), ed. Stefania Santelia (Bari: Levante, 1991); discussed as a kind of
‘pulp fiction’ by Mario Andreassi, ‘II mimo tra “consumo” e “letteratura”: Charition e Moicheutria \ Ancient Narrative 2 (2002), 30-46.
82 Features ofa discourse and contains parallels, beyond that, with Euripides’ Iphigenia among the Taurians. The Indians are characterised by unintelligible speech, which
presumably adds to the coarse humour of the drama. India is presented,
in this brief text, as a more vivid location than we find in the novels, and
the prominence of language is unmatched. Yet, in keeping with the genre of mime, much more so than the novels, ethnic difference is exaggerated
for humorous effect. The drunken revels of the Indians, which allow the
protagonists to escape, again evoke the triumph of Dionysus.
ii. ‘hanging tags’: topics of thought
Any survey of ethnographic excursuses in Roman literature reveals a high
degree of overlap in the topics described, and the manner of their presentation. Standard topics include the following: mythic or historical ori- gins, populousness, somatic features, warfare, clothing, conditions of living (including eating and accommodation) , social structure and political organisation, religious practice, gender relations and marriage. The recurrence of these has been observed in a variety of specific and general studies . 58 In the case of excursuses in historical works, there is every justification for speaking of the ethnographic set piece. It is easy to see that a set number of such criteria engage a writer in discussing any given people, as if in answer to a questionnaire. Broadly speaking, the questions recur even though the order differs. While the term ‘questionnaire’ is used here in a notional sense, there are important hints of its more concrete origins at an
early stage in the formation of classical ethnography. The Hippocratic Airs
waters places was written for a medical practitioner; in his travels he needed
to find out particular information about any place he reached before being
able to treat its inhabitants. This was based on the assumption that there was an intrinsic relation of local conditions on the one hand and physiol- ogy and psychology on the other. 59 It is here, when the Hippocratic author
prescribes what geographic and human features the physician should seek
out, that we see an ethnographic questionnaire in its most concrete form. This illustrates vividly what we find implied in later instances of the ethnographic tradition, one which is attuned to many of the same features and
tends also to assume a fixed relation of locality to human character. But what were those criteria?
s8 On the continuity of historiographic tradition in this respect, e. g., Muller, Ethnographies vol. I, pp. 104—6; Comelii Taciti De Vita Agricolae, ed. R. M. Ogilvie and Sir Ian Richmond (Oxford: Clarendon, 1967), p. 164, on Tacitus’ excursus on the Britons utAgr. 10-12.
59 Thomas, Herodotus in context.
India described 83
II. 1. Indian pasts Origins constitute one ofthe most persistent themes in ancient ethnography
generally, 60 and a convenient point at which to begin surveying descriptions of India. The main lines can be summarised as follows: Indians led an
uncouth, nomadic existence before being conquered in the military campaigns of Dionysus and Heracles, who brought with them the blessings of
civilisation . 61 These two installed rulers, with whom India’s royal succession began. On Dionysus’ departure from India, says Arrian, he appointed as king Spatembas, ‘the most Bacchically inclined of his Companions’. 62 He
ruled for fifty-two years, and was succeeded by his son Budyas for twenty, and he in turn by his son Cradeuas. Heracles’ solitary daughter was to become India’s only sovereign queen, ruling the Pandae in the area beyond
the Indus . 63 For Arrian, Heracles is an indigenous figure even though he came to India as a conqueror and civiliser: there are several versions of Heracles, and
Indians have a version that they call their own. 64 In this way Arrian grafts a Greek foundation myth onto Indian tradition. Heracles, like Dionysus,
thus makes it possible for Alexander’s troops to find their bearings in this strange land, according to Arrian. In reality, however, these myths were
likely fabricated by Alexander’s own officers . 65 By this reckoning, the same
deity supposedly existed in various, geographically distinct forms. One
effect of this perceived similarity of deities is to minimise the cultural distance between India and the Greek world. Significantly, though, this occurs at the very time the military narrative is predicated on a sense of distance between them, and with that the magnitude of Alexander’s achievement . 66 Pliny, moving his focus westwards from the Ganges to the Indus Valley,
offers an explicit localisation of Dionysus:
Furthermore, people generally include in India the city of Nysa and mount Merus, which is sacred to father Bacchus, for this is the source of the tale that he was born
60 Triidinger, Ethnographic, esp. 130—1, laid the groundwork for much subsequent work on this topic;
cfi, more recently, Lund, Germanenbild, and Hartog, Memories ofOdysseus.
61 The same is implied, for example, in Tacitus’ vague report of the story that Hercules had visited Germany {Germ. 2). 62 tgov exalpcov eva tov pocKycobecrraTOV, 8.1.
63 Pliny HN6.76.
64 Trap’ auTotcnv ’IvSoTai yriyevEa Agyeo-Qai, Ind. 8.4. It is clear from Herodotus 2.43 and Arrian, Anab. 2.16.4, both of them discussing native Egyptian forms of Heracles, that he was seen as a multiple rather than single figure. Arrian applies this same principle to Dionysus.
65 See Chapter 1, section II. 1 above.
66 For a comparable case of the surprising similarity ofcultures, see Philostr. VA 3.12, at the point when
Apollonius is recognised by name and addressed in Greek by the messenger of the wise men.
8 4 Features ofa discourse from Jupiter’s thigh; and likewise the Aspagani, a people abundant in vines, laurel
trees and all fruit that grows in Greece. (6. 79)
S/ In this way, Pliny ends his description of India as it began (6.61), by refer- ring to the theme that runs through it: Alexander’s expedition. In particular, the flora mentioned in this passage effectively connect India with the Mediterranean.
In their most obvious aspect, there is no difficulty in making sense of such stories. Arrian gives a clear hint of what is at stake, though his comment does contain a mark ofcaution: he suggests it is part ofthe Greco- Macedonian rhetoric of empire, a ‘boast’.
68 This ‘mythmaking’ seems to have had its roots in the propaganda circulating at the time of Alexander’s
conquests. 69 Both Heracles and Dionysus were important to Alexander’s
self-presentation as a culture-hero; both were famous for their exploits at the very fringes of the oikoumene. Heracles was otherwise more often linked with the far western Mediterranean, such as the island of Erytheia, the abode of Geryon;70 at the very western end of the Mediterranean stood
the Pillars of Heracles. Dionysus, on the other hand, whose own origins
are usually thought to be Thracian, was specifically linked with the eastern Mediterranean and with Asia as far as India. Dionysus was one of the most
frequently depicted deities, and his triumphal return from India was a
favourite motif on Roman sarcophagi.71 Dionysus’ connection with India
is suggested first in Euripides’ Bacchae; 72 but only much later, by the time
the story had been strongly tinged by the Alexander narrative, was this part of the Dionysus myth to receive its fullest expression, in Nonnus’ lengthy
Dionysiaca. 7
3
It is one thing to identify the specific Alexandrian or late-antique context
for the Heracles and Dionysus stories. But, more importantly for present purposes, what do they tell us about Greco-Roman ideas concerning India’s
67 nec non et Nysam urbem plerique Indiae adscribunt montemque Merum, Libero Patri sacrum, unde
origo fabulae, Iouis femine edition; item Aspaganos gentem, uitis et lauri et buxi pomorumque omnium
in Graecia nascentium fertilem.
68 McckeSovikov Sokeei |ioi ti Koinracjna (Ind. 5.10), where the last word quoted has a decidedly
negative edge. It is usually used in the plural, with the same effect: e.g. Ar. Ran. 940.
69 Alexander and the East (Oxford: Clarendon, 1996), esp. ch. 4, ‘The creation of belief.’ On origins as retrojection, more generally, see Edward W. Said, Beginnings: intention and method, 2nd edn (New
York: Basic, 1997).
70 Galinsky, Herakles theme. Among his labours, the girdle of the Amazon, Cerberus and the apples of
the Hesperides were the others specifically to involve the edges of the earth.
71 Discussed in Chapter 3, section 1.2. 72 James Diggle, Euripidea: collected essays (Oxford: Clarendon, 1994), pp. 444-53.
73 Bowersock, ‘Dionysus’, in Hopkinson, Studies, pp. 156-66; cf. his Hellenism in late antiquity (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1990).
India described 85 past? On the one hand, they do give India a certain historical depth: Pliny mentions that Indian history entails 153 kings over 6,451 years and 3 months,
to count from Dionysus to Alexander (6.59). This number is of course sus- piciously high and precise; but then Pliny’s comment about these and
other numbers suggests a note of caution on his own part. The number
of India’s kings is the measure of its antiquity. At one level this invites comparison with Herodotus’ Egypt, of which it is possible to say the same
thing.74 On the other hand, there is a very different principle at work
here: the use of Dionysus as a defining point of Indian history has the
effect of predicating India’s past on that of the Greek world; of implying,
in effect, that Greece is more ancient than India. If we were to compare
this comment with the time-depth accorded other eastern societies, it is curiously hesitant. In Pliny’s India there is nothing to match, for example, the story of Psammetichos’ experiment to test the relative antiquity of Phrygians and Egyptians (2.2) or the extended narrative supposedly
based on the priests’ king-lists, dominating the second part of the book. Within the discourse of cultural priority, Indian history is abbreviated
in a way that brings credit to the Greeks. Consequently it would be no
exaggeration to detect the tone of imperial conquest in the tales about
Heracles and Dionysus as bringers of civilisation. The version of ethnographic time we see here is what Johannes Fabian has called the ‘denial of
coevalness’.75 Whereas literacy and urbanism are central to Greek and Roman descriptions of eastern lands, especially Egypt, those criteria are scarcely visible in Roman Indography. The best explanation for this relative absence involves
a return to the Achaemenid empire, emphasised in the first chapter. There
is no reason to suppose that Persian accounts of India were particularly concerned with its antiquity. This is, admittedly, an argument from silence, but
it does explain Herodotus’ lack of comment on the subject. While it is true
that the urban settlements of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro were only a few
centuries younger than Mesopotamian civilisation, that relative chronology
does not appear to be reflected in Persian sources. And if Hellenistic Greeks
74 Egyptian kings as an index of that land’s antiquity: Vasunia, Gift ofthe Nile
,
ch. 3; Stadter, Arrian,
pp. 116-17, makes the comparison between India and Egypt here. And cf. Philostr. VA 2.19.
75 Time and the Other: how anthropology makes its object (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983);
cf. Vasunia, Gift ofthe Nile, pp. 110—35. One may compare here Walter D. Mignolo’s comments, in a New World context, about ‘literacy and the colonization of memory: writing history of people without history:’ The darker side ofthe Renaissance: literacy, territoriality andcolonization (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1995), pp. 127—35. The notion that colonialism determines who does and who does not ‘have history’ was memorably expressed by Eric R. Wolf, in Europe and the people without history (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982).
86 Features ofa discourse and subsequendy Romans were heir to a basically Achaemenid image of
India, it stands to reason that antiquity will not have been a major feature. Certainly the myths of Heracles and Dionysus appear to be later, post- Herodotean additions. There is every reason to sense, with Bosworth, that they formed part of Alexander’s self-presentation.
If Greek and Roman views of India’s past had a military context, then it
is also true that the subject of warfare involves some degree of contradiction, within Strabo’s Geography alone. At one point he claims that Indians
are unwarlike (15.1.6 C686)/6 yet elsewhere that they are well behaved when at war (15. 1.53 C709). Before Alexander’s campaign, he says, Indi- ans had neither suffered invasion nor dispatched an invading army. Arrian
says that the Indians had not even been attacked, barring two unsuccessful attempts;77 but later he speaks of the Indians’ war equipment. Diodorus,
while discussing India’s fertility, says that agricultural workers are left undis- turbed even if hostilities take place in their immediate proximity; this diverges from the normal practice whereby enemies destroy land (2.36.6—
7). The contradiction implicit here suggests that both Strabo and Arrian were using a variety of sources, or that the sources they were using, such as Megasthenes, were themselves compilations ofdiverse information. On the
face of it, this would seem like a prime case of Nissen’s law. 78 Lying behind
the assertion of peacefulness, however directly contradicted elsewhere, is a
certain idealisation: the point is less an absence ofwar in itself than the ideal, so central to Aristotle’s Politics, of auTapKsia (self-sufficiency). 79 Some of
this subject matter will return in the discussion of utopianism below.
I1. 2. Profusion The next topic to consider is India’s populousness. Diodorus speaks of £0vr| TtoAAd (2.38.1). The recurrence of this topic in various ancient Indographies, and something that continues to be remarked by travellers up to the present day, suggests that it was part of the earliest descriptions.80 This is reflected in Pliny’s comment on ‘peoples and cities beyond number’, which
76 Cf. Arr. Ind. 5.4. 77 Ind. 5.5—7: ‘Sesostris the Egyptian’ and Semiramis the Assyrian queen. Both of these figures featured prominently in the Greek romances: Giovanni Pettinato, Semiramide (Milan: Rusconi, 1985).
78 See e.g. Hornblower’s comment that Diodorus used one main source at a time’, in ‘Sources and
their uses’, CAH, 2nd edn. (1994), vol. VI, pp. 1-23 at 9; and cf. Brent D. Shaw, ‘The Elder Pliny’s African geography’, Historia 30 (1981), 424-71.
79 For self-sufficiency as a goal in human associations, see e.g. Arist. Pol. I252b27-i253ai; cf. [Plato] Def. 4i2b6. From the viewpoint of historical ecology, Peregrine Horden and Nicholas Purcell, The
corrupting sea: a study ofMediterranean history (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000), pp. 112-15, contrast this goal with practice; cf, Chapter 6, section II. 1 below.
80 Compare Chapter 1, section II above.
India described 87 he notes with some exasperation while paying lip service to the goal of
systematic coverage.
81 Arrian cites Megasthenes in saying that there are 118 eOvea, but he questions how Megasthenes could have known this, given
that he visited only a limited part of India, and that various groups do
not necessarily mix with each other (Ind. 7.1). This suggests that Arrian,
like Pliny, was acutely aware of the link between descriptive numbers and
claims of grandeur. This talk about populousness is part of the discourse of abundance and profusion that goes back to an early stage of Greco-Roman
ethnographic writing, and would prove especially persistent in the case of
India. This is sometimes connected with attention to India’s rivers (e.g., Diodorus 2.35.2). On the strength ofsuch passages, one scholar has claimed that India is, in
classical literature, a marvel of inner space, not outer.
8z But this cannot be upheld in view of other parts of the same descriptions: much is said in the
texts under consideration byway ofoutlining the organisation ofouter space
as well. For example, Arrian devotes the second and third chapters of his Indica to describing the geographical shape of India, as if on a diagrammatic map.83 He is careful to define it in terms of borders: to its west is the Indus,
to its north Mount Taurus or Caucasus, to its south the Great Sea; about
the east there is no clarity. 84 Arrian’s approach here in outlining the shape of
India is typical of those writers who were familiar with the Greek tradition of mathematical geography: pre-eminently Strabo and later Ptolemy, and
even to a lesser extent Pliny. This mathematical aspect is absent, however, from Mela and the later Plinian tradition of Solinus and others. In this respect it is helpful to invoke the distinction Strabo and Ptolemy make
between geography and chorography: the first is fundamentally on a global
scale, whereas the second is articulated in regional and more detailed maps
and tracts.85
//.j. Social divisions Indian society consisted ofgroups, mere or genea. Diodorus and other Greek
sources present a seven-fold division, consisting of philosophers, farmers,
81 gentes urbesque innumerae, 6.58 (cf. 6.59).
82 Romm, Edges
,
p. 83.
8? Cf. even Curt. 8.9.2-3, as the brief start to a lengthy digression.
84 Alexander did not go beyond the Hyphasis, and therefore no good information about it exists (cf Ind. 4.1 and 6.1). Some writers have ventured as far as the Ganges, and seen India’s largest city, Palibothra. Pliny also (6.56-69) begins his section on India by describing its outer proportions.
85 On the distinction, see Claude Nicolet, Space, geography, andpolitics in the early Roman empire (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1991), pp. 4, too and 171-2. Tellingly, this was an issue mostly
for the Greek tradition, which nurtured both, whereas the Latin tradition was much more largely limited to chorography.
88 Features ofa discourse shepherds, artisans, soldiers, overseers and councillors. On the other hand,
Pliny offers a different division of the 'more civilised’ Indians {mittores populi, 6.66): cultivators, soldiers, long-distance traders, statesmen, wise men and elephant-keepers. 86 The difference between the two lists, not
least the fact that they are listed in a different order, suggests that Diodorus and Pliny have used divergent sources on this topic. Indian sources, on the other hand, refer to a fourfold division of society. The famous Purusha-sukta (‘Hymn of man’), dated to around 500 bc, recounts the creation ofthe world from the dismemberment ofthe primeval
giant Purusa ( Rig Veda 10.90.12). This is a key foundational text of ancient Indian religion, but the social reality it constructs is considerably complicated by later texts. For example, the Arthashastra tells of eighteen different kinds of high official (jnahamtras) , including a chancellor (samahrtr) and
treasurer (samnidhatr). 8y The purpose of mentioning this is to show that further subdivisions were very likely. How the many contradictions should be resolved is unclear, and this
is not the place to make the attempt, especially since the fourfold Vedic
division mentioned above does not preclude the possibility of further subdivisions.
88 But it is not stretching a point to suggest that the key to understanding Diodorus’ division is Herodotus, who offers an identical analysis of Egyptian society in the book of his Histories. 99 The fact that Strabo
cites Herodotus explicitly (15.1.16 C691), though in a different connection, makes such a comparison all the more plausible. Greek and Roman Indography contains a number of explicit statements
that there were no slaves in India. Thus Diodorus:
86
(1) tellurem exercent, (2) miliriam alii capessunt, (3) merces alii suas euehunt, externas inuehunt, (4) res publicas optumi ditissimique temperant, indicia reddunt, regibus adsident. (5) quintum genus, celebratae
ibi et prope in religionem uersae sapientiae deditum, uoluntaria semper morte uitam accenso prius rogo
finit. (6) unum super haec estsemiferum acplenum laboris inmensi . . . uenandi elephantos domandique. ‘One group works the land; a second hunts; a third exports and imports goods; a fourth, the most
eminent and wealthy, takes care of public administration, judges legal cases and constitutes the kings advisors. A fifth group, dedicated to wisdom that is celebrated there and virtually regarded
as religion, always finishes their lives with suicide on a pyre that is lit in advance. Beyond these, one group is half savage and fully engaged in the onerous task of hunting and taming elephants.’
It is striking to what extent suicide is a distinctive mark of the holy people, the fifth group
mentioned. Murphy, Pliny, 120—5, tellingly compares Pliny’s account of the suicide practised by the Hyperboreans - at the far end of the orbis terrarum compared to the Indians — with an ‘early imperial ideology of suicide’ (122).
87 Kautilya, The Arthashastra, tr. L. N. Rangarajan (Oxford University Press, 1992), p. 208.
88 Romila Thapar, Culturalpasts: essays in early Indian history (Oxford University Press, 2000), pp. 488-
512. For earlier attempts to make sense of the social structure implied here see Chapter 1, section
II. 2 above.
89 Hdt. 1.56, 101; 2.164
India described 89 Concerning the customs ofthe Indians which are unique to them, one may consider
that which was drawn up by their ancient sages to be the most remarkable; for
it has been decreed that under no circumstances shall anyone among them be a
slave, but that everyone shall be free and honour the equal status of all persons.
(2.39.5)
90 Here, what might otherwise have been presented in ethnographic rhetoric
as an absence, or as a cultural deficit,91
is listed as a positive attribute: the
lack of slavery. Many scholars have taken this to be an idealising note. 92 The moralistic tone of Diodorus’ comment makes clear that this is, from
his point of view, something positive, in other words, that he is exercising the most positive connotations of the polyvalent adjective 0aupdcnos. The strangeness of this passage comes into full relief when it is realised that slavery is seldom presented in such abstract terms, as an institution; it
is much more common for ancient writers to talk about slaves as individuals or groups.93 Two passages in Philo may be the key to understanding the sentiment expressed: Every good man isfree 79 and On the contemplative life jo, concerning the Essenes and Therapeutae respectively. 94 In evidence, in both cases, are groups who are viewed en bloc as philosophers. The passages
in Philo make it clear that the absence of slaves is the hallmark of a nation of philosophers; it seems that India too must be understood in this light, as we shall discuss in detail in Chapter 6. Beyond philosophers, India rates highly in another sphere of special knowledge, namely the medical. Thus Indian doctors, unlike their Greek
counterparts, are able to cure snake-bites, says Arrian citing Nearchus as his source (Ind
.
15.11-12). As mentioned by Arrian, these doctors (it|Tpo() are a subset of the philosophers. Since the seasons are so temperate, there
are few diseases, and hence little need for doctors. Strabo also speaks of
Indian medicine, at 15. 1.45 C706 and 15.1.60 C713, citing Nearchus and
Megasthenes. The spectacular suicide ofCalanus, as we have already seen, is one feature
that made him the Indian holy man par excellence in Greek and Roman
sources. In fact, to j udge from Josephus, suicide is the distinguishing mark of
90 vopipcov 8’ ovtcov irapa toTs ’Iv5oTs evicov s£r|AAay|i£VG0V OauiiaaicoTaTov av tis T^ynaaiTo to KaTaSeiyOev Otto tcov apycacov Trap’ outoTs (JhAocto^cov vEvopo0ETr|Tai yap Trap’ avTois 8oOAov pev pr)56va elvai to Trapdnav, EAeuOgpous 8’ UTrapyovTas tt)v iaoTTiTa Tipav ev iraai.
91 See below in this chapter.
92 Thapar, Cultural pasts, p. 510, stresses that Helots in Spartan society are the particular point of comparison here, and that such statements should be understood in a generalised way.
93 Thomas Wiedemann, Greek and Roman slavery (London: Routledge, 1981).
94 The comparison is made by P. D. A. Garnsey, Ideas ofslavery in antiquity (Cambridge University
Press, 1998), p. 78.
90 Features ofa discourse a more generalised use of ‘Calani’. 95 Its importance to the Indian philoso- phers merits detailed discussion in Chapter 6 below, where the holiness they represent emerges as a distinctively male affair. But in this survey of
Indography, it is important to examine a distinctively feminine context for
suicide, by which we may consider it to be very differently gendered.96
II. 4. Gender relations If gender was a staple of ethnographic visions beginning at least with
Herodotus, then India reveals some particular phenomena.97 The custom
of sati, whereby the wives of a dead man voluntarily burn themselves on
his funeral pyre, was first mentioned in Cicero among western sources
{Tusc. 5.77-78). For Cicero in this passage, India per se is of less concern
than Rome itself. Though India is a barbarous country, it does show some
remarkable signs of virtue: its philosophers can endure the most trying
physical conditions, and its women compete with one another in showing
loyalty to their deceased husbands. 98 He invokes Spartans and Egyptians
also in this passage. The larger question in the book is whether virtue is enough for the happy life; specifically in this passage, the point is that to
feel pain must always be natural. 99 The important feature about Cicero’s reference to sati, then, is that it furnishes the rhetorical material of proof,
as part of a larger argument to which it is only tangentially linked. In terms of the distinction made at the start of this chapter, this is a classic case of a passing reference to India made within a different context. By the same token, when Propertius speaks about sati he too projects
virtues onto a distant place, away from morally decayed Rome to chaste
India. The poem reveals much about why India should have interested Propertius: There is a uniquely felicitous custom of funerals among eastern husbands, whom
the red dawn tinges with her own horses. For when the last torch has been thrown
95 Joseph. Ap. 1. 179; cf. Chapter i, section II and Chapter 6, section III. 96 The topos is documented in W. Heckel and J. Yardley, ‘Roman writers and the Indian practice of
suttee’, Philol. 125 (1981), 305-11. The practice lives on in India today.
97 E.g. Triidinger, Ethnographic, pp. 13, 25; Balsdon, Romans and aliens, pp. 234-5.
98 Plut. Mor. 499C, in his essay ‘Can vice cause unhappiness’, also stresses that the element of competition between the widows, before proceeding to the male equivalent of the virtuous death: the
suicide of the Indian philosophers {sophot) while still healthy.
99 Earlier, at 2.40, India is also mentioned by way of an example to illustrate the point that people can be trained to endure pain. The baldness of Cicero’s comment - uri se patiuntur Indi — shows
that the story to which it refers, namely the suicide of Calanus, is readily understood, and needs no
explanation.
India described 9i onto the funeral pyre, the dutiful crowd of widows stands with flowing hair, and
hold a deadly competition as to which of them will, living, follow her husband: it is a source of shame not to have had the chance to die . . . But we have a faithless race of brides, and among us no girl will be a faithful Evadne or a devout Penelope.
(3.13.15-20, 23-24)100 On the one hand, the passage quoted offers a line of thought familiar from
Cicero: faithful Indian women are contrasted with venal Roman women,
and there is an implied contrast also between the marital status of the Indian wives and the learned young women (doctae puellae) represented by Cynthia, although she is not named in this poem.
101 On this account
Indian sati is the hypertrophe of idealised female fidelity. However, such an
analysis is complicated by any consideration of the Propertian corpus, or even ofthe elegy itself. It begins with a harangue about how Roman women
have become corrupted by luxuries from the east, in a tone reminiscent of
the elder Pliny. 102 Propertius moves from this to a general attack on the decline of religion and the rise of corrupting luxury in Rome. In several of
Propertius’ poems silk is emblematic of luxury, with all its attendant moral
dangers.103 The irony of poem 3.13 is that within its complex movement
the east is seen both as the origin of morally corrupting luxuries and as the
place of the most desirable Romanfides.
10* Even if this poem is yet another case of Propertius’ intellectual adventurousness, an important point remains: the ostensible focus on India cloaks
a concern with morality, a concern firmly centred on Rome itself. By this
100 felix Eois lexfuneris una maritis, quos Aurora suis rubra colorat equis! namque ubi mortifero iactastfax ultima lecto, uxorum fusis stat pia turba comis, et certamen habent leti, quae uiua sequatur coniugium: pudor est non licuisse mori. . . . hoc genus infidum nuptarum, hie nulla puella
necfida Euadne nec pia Penelope.
101 The thought underlying Indian polygamy can be understood with reference to Germ. 17, where
Tacitus describes the Germans as being Virtually the only foreign people to be content with one
wife apiece’.
102 See farther Chapter 4, section II. 103 See Jasper Griffin, ‘Augustan poetry and the life of luxury’, Latin poets and Roman life (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1986), pp. 1—31. That silk in elegy comes from Cos rather than
the east is not an issue here, given that the east is very specifically linked with luxury goods in the first four couplets: thus Indian gold (line 5), shells from the Red Sea (6), dyes from Tyre (7), and aromatics from Arabia (8). Also, it must be admitted that the practice of sati alluded to in the quotation does not explicitly mention India, but in practice there can be no question about this identification.
104 An added complication within the poem is that the ideal of female virtue is identified with two
heroines of Greek mythology, Evadne and Penelope.
92 Features ofa discourse reckoning Propertius’ India, like Cicero’s, constitutes very much the mirror of Rome.105 Furthermore, it well illustrates the contradictions implicit in what might be called, by an umbrella term, a single ethnographic discourse. Though Cicero is writing a philosophical treatise, and Propertius an elegy, the use they both make of India is reminiscent of the rhetorical schools, where exempla would be used to add force to a point. 106
It is no accident
that luxury is such a major theme in Curtius Rufus’ excursus on India, given that his work too has been shown to owe much to the rhetorical tradition of declamation: luxury was one of the topics to recur in rhetorical
exercises, and India provided an obvious pretext. There is a hint of moral language in Arrian’s preliminary description of Indians, narrated at the point when Alexander and his troops reached
the Indus. According to Arrian, new reports came back to the effect that the Indians had no gold and were ‘in no way extravagant in their way of
life’ (5. 4.4).
107 The comment about their lacking gold seems to be revi- sionist in its tone, and this is not surprising in view of passages referring to gold dust.
108 Curtius makes pointed reference to the luxurious living of
the Indians, especially their kings (8.9), and this may be the kind of refer- ence Arrian had in mind. Also, Pliny, in describing Taprobane (6.79-91), complains that the island is beset with vices, despite its remoteness: But not even Taprobane, though consigned by nature outside the world, lacks our vices: there too gold and silver have commercial value, marble is considered
similar to tortoise-shell, and pearls and gems have high prestige. Their entire mass
of luxury is greater than ours. (6.89)
109 Negative though the tone of these comments may be, Pliny nonetheless proceeds directly to a list offeatures which single Taprobane out for a higher moral status, for Romans surpass the Sri Lankans in their use of wealth: its people have no slaves, they do not sleep into the daytime, their houses are moderate and low in height, they have no litigation, they worship Hercules and they choose their king on the basis of merit and childlessness. Pliny distinguishes luxury goods and their use, separating origin and
consumption, with the result that, by turns, he casts aspersions on both
105 The use of this concept is borrowed from Hartog, Mirror ofHerodotus.
106 Cf. L Inde, ed. Andr6 and Filliozat, for comparable cases in the declamations of the elder Seneca and Pseudo-Quintilian. The exempla encapsulate moral ideals: H. I. Marrou, A history ofeducation
in antiquity (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1956), p. 235.
107 fjKiaTa x^iScovTas Kcrra rqv SiaiTav. 108 Strabo 15. 1.47 C707 and 15.1.69 C718.
109 sed ne Taprobane quidem, quamuis extra orbem a natura relagata, nostris uitiis caret: aurum argentum
et ibi in pretio, marmor testudinis simile, margaritae gemmaeque in honore; multo praestantior est totus luxuriae nostra cumulus.
India described 93
Sri Lankans and Romans. Both deserve criticism, by Pliny’s way ofthinking, by their association with such commodities. But in the process a contradiction arises. Such contradictions arise when ethnographic discourse turns
precipitously towards its own society, to be held up as a mirror. 110
7/.y. Space and race Indographers reveal some interest in somatic features. In some cases, Ethiopians, the original ‘burnt-faces’, arise by way of comparison. Prox- imity to the sun, greater in the south than the north, accounts for this and
also for woolly hair.
111 Pliny presents this phenomenon as a variable factor within India: the faces of those living south of the Ganges are especially burnt, yet even they are not as black as the Ethiopians (6.70). The closer to the Indus they live, he says, switching from the one major river to the
other, the darker their skin-colour (also 6.70). Arrian too presents a gradation between north and south (Ind. 6.9). The linen they wear is brighter than any other, or else the darkness of their skins makes it seem brighter
(16.1). But skin-colour is not the only somatic feature mentioned by Roman
writers: Strabo speaks of a predilection for dyeing beards and hair (15. 1.30 C699);111 Arrian’s Indians are lean, tall and light in their movement (6. 17).
113 Do the features described here merit the label of race? The working definition of race used here is of the ‘essentialising of groups of people which
are held then to display inherent, persistent or predictive characteristics, and which thus had a biological or quasi-biological basis’."4 Certainly, it is clear from the texts above that Pliny, Arrian and others identified Indians
in terms of a particular somatic profile, one that emphasized darkness of
skin-colour. What is less clear is the significance of these somatic features within the broader picture of Indography. Indeed, it is one thing to point
to the existence of somatic difference in Roman thinking, and it is another
to explore the social meanings of such difference. Taken together with
110 On the gendered vision of India in seventeenth-century Britain, see Kate Teltscher, India inscribed: European and British writing on India, 1600—1800 (Oxford University Press, 1995), pp. 37-73.
111 Dihle, ‘Der fruchtbare Osten’, in Antike und Orient (1984); Schneider, L’fethiopie et l’lnde, PP- 88-95.
112 Arr. Ind. 16.4, following Nearchus.
113 In Chapter 6, section II. 2 we shall see the emphasis placed on the characteristic beards and esp. gestures of Indian holy men.
114 Peter Robb, ‘South Asia and the concept of race’, in The concept ofrace in South Asia, ed. Peter Robb (Oxford University Press, 1995), p. 1; cf. Mark Harrison, Climates and constitutions (Oxford
University Press, 1999), p. 12. On the relation of race and ethnicity in studying Mediterranean
antiquity, see Denise Eileen McCoskey, ‘By any other name? Ethnicity and the study of ancient
identity’, Classical Bulletin 79 (2003), 93-109.
94 Features ofa discourse the visual representations of these features, such passages are few and far between, in their extent far outweighed by passages emphasising the social
life of Indians. Indography offers nothing to match Aeschylus’ linking of
black skins, death and sexual desire in the Suppliants."5 A further problem
concerns the ‘biological basis’ of these somatic references. Generally speaking, the idea of environmental determinism, articulated in the Hippocratic
Airs waters places, was well known in the world of Pliny and Arrian, and
this could, in principle, provide a framework for comprehending distant
India. It is not clear, however, whether or to what extent this framework
was actually applied to India (on which, more below). In sum, then, race is indeed an issue in passages such as those mentioned. Yet, equally, it is clear that Roman Indography dwelled far more on cultural rather than somatic
features of identity, and this would suggest the predominance of an ethnic over a racial vision of India. 116
II. 6. Catalogue or system? The features sketched above, taken together, bear testimony to the organisational power of the ethnographic questionnaire, as described by Triidinger and Muller - one form of the intellectual activity that Mark Twain called ‘hanging tags’. Yet, in two important respects they fail to do justice to descriptions of India: plants and especially animals serve to mark India
as a region; by virtue of its rivers, too, India is distinctive. 117 The link of
place and people in ancient ethnographic thought cautions us to bear these topographic criteria in mind alongside the purely ethnographic.
Arrian’s only mention of snakes is at Indica 15.11, in the context of Indian
medicine: unlike the Greek doctors, the Indians had a cure for snakebite,
so much so that ocjoi lr|TpiKT]v croct>cbTcrroi were assembled by Alexander for consultation in case of such an emergency. These doctors are thus presented as a case of specialised local knowledge. Elsewhere too snakes
receive some degree of attention."8 At 15.2.7 C723, Strabo speaks of them
115 Vasunia, Gift ofthe Nile, pp. 47—53.
116 An underlying problem in identifying racial difference in antiquity may be articulated as another
question: what is at stake in identifying somatic difference herd? Such a question might help transcend the polarised terms of debate around race in antiquity, e.g., Frank M. Snowden, Jr, ‘Bernals “Blacks” and the Afrocentrists’, in Black Athena revisited, ed. Mary R. Lefkowitz and Guy
MacLean Rogers (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996), pp. 112-28; and Martin
Bernal, Black Athena writes back (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002), pp. 66—9.
117 In fairness, though, it should be remembered that Trtidinger’s work focuses on ethnography, at the expense (for example here) of geographical questions. In this chapter I interpret ethnography
a little more broadly, so as to capture the link between people and place that is very much part of
Indography.
118 Strabo 15.1.28, 45 (Onescritus and Aristobulos).
India described 95
as one of the soldiers’ greatest fears.
119 Such passages suggest that fear itself played some part in Alexander’s campaign. Uniquely, Philostratus’ India
is beset by dragons, which may be a novelistic expansion of the same
idea. 120 Whereas animals and plants underline the similarities between India and Africa generally, rivers suggest comparison with Egypt in particular. Certainly, rivers feature large in descriptions of India. They have already been considered in the context of Alexander history as borders of knowledge.121 Diodorus mentions first the Ganges: this is the largest in size and
in number of elephants, so much so that Alexander’s troops took fright and
mutinied once they had reached that point. It is worth noting, in passing, the misconception that Alexander did in fact arrive at the Ganges with his entire army, following his conquest of the other Indian peoples: For when he had reached the river Ganges with his entire army, having subdued
the rest of the Indians . . . (2.37. 3)
122 In fact, Alexander’s expedition did not reach the Ganges but turned back
at the River Hyphasis or Hypanis. At all events, Diodorus continues by
describing the Indus and its main tributaries, the Hypanis, the Hydaspes and the Acesinus, then the multitude of other rivers (2.37.5). Taken as a whole, the ethnographic profile of India to emerge here
presents a potential problem of interpretation: is there any contradiction in the coexistence in the same texts of well-organised social groupings on the one hand and marvellous creatures on the other? In other words, how are we
to reconcile the India of Breloer and Timmer with that of Wittkower and Romm? If we are to judge from the one complete Indography that exists, namely Arrian’s Indica, it appears that there was no such contradiction in the minds of Greco-Roman authors. Arrian is concerned with the accuracy of his information, it is true, yet this does not preclude his own inclusion of marvels. 123 This reflects a variegated picture of India, one in which phenomena are wilder the farther out you move. Such an analysis is of some help, in a general way: for all its limitations in modern studies, the model of centre and periphery does reflect something of ancient spatial thinking. The idea is implicit in the overall geography sketched by Arrian
119 Cf. Diod. 17.90 = Clitarchus F18. 120 Philostr. VA 3.6-8.
121 Strabo 15. 1.27 C697-698; Arr. Ind. 4.1 and 6.1 on the Hyphasis. Cf. Dihle, ‘Conception’, on the
significance of rivers in Indography.
122 kcctocvTT) ctas yap eiri tov Tayyr|v TroTapov peTa uaor^s Tf\s Suvapscos, Kai tous aAAous ’IvSous KonraTToAgpriaas.
123 At the very point at which Arrian says he will not be tempted into talking about India beyond the Hyphasis, he mentions the story of the river Silas, in which nothing can float (6.1-3, following Megasthenes).
96 Features ofa discourse
at the beginning of his Indica, and corresponds to other ethnographic texts. The same feature can be found in both the Periplus ofthe Erythraean Sea and in Tacitus’ Germania; the differences between these two texts suggests how deep the feature lies in ethnographic thought. To end this section, it is as well to return to the ancient theory mentioned at its start. The Hippocratic notion of environmental determinism,
seen most obviously in Airs waters places, is common currency in ancient ethnographic texts. Those describing India are no exception. Yet there is an important caveat to bear in mind here: though the overall system thus
described makes provision for India, the region itself is not explicitly mentioned in the work. The farthest east the Hippocratic text goes is Lake
Maeotis (17); India is thus, strictly speaking, off the map. Thus Arrian says that the ‘Indians suffer few diseases, because the seasons are temperate’
{Ind. 15. 12).
124 This theory is less important in itself than in relation to the concept of nature as it emerges in several of our texts. We should not forget that Stoicism, even if merely a loose version, left its mark on Aelian and Pliny. Arrian too came from a Stoic milieu, even if its philosophical system did not affect him particularly strongly. With Pliny, however, we are on a firmer
footing. At a key point in his seventh book he says that ‘nature produced all such things, games to itselfbut marvels to us’ (7. 32).
125 Casual though such a remark may seem, its placing is important: within his anthropological book
there is a passage on strange human phenomena, in which India makes a second major appearance in his work. Whereas books 3 to 6 offered a chorographical conspectus of the world, including India, this seventh book
effectively offers a precis of the description of India. It is tempting to assert that this different context emphasises what India really means to Pliny, and indeed to several Roman writers: a place of marvels, both human and
animal, which redound to the glory of nature. Implicit in this catalogue is a working definition of ethnicity as defined from outside: the questions informing the ‘questionnaire’ are the effective
criteria of ethnic identity. But, it must be remembered, this is the ethnic
identity of a distant people, and it is one that is etically attributed rather than emically claimed. Such names do not necessarily reflect the practices of the people described. 126 Given the radical otherness of Indians, it is unclear what purpose is served by invoking the terms of ethnicity at all. If
124 ou ttoAAcx 6e ev ’IvSoTai na0Ea yivETai, oti ai copai auppETpoi eujiv auToOi.
125 haec atque talia ex hominum genere ludibria sibi, nobis miracula, ingeniosafecit natura.
126 Countless examples could be given of the tendency whereby a group of people is known by a name
conferred on them by their immediate neighbours. Sometimes this name is ‘loaded’, e.g., Tzvetan
India described 97 we are to understand ethnicity as an ongoing, complex negotiation between
ascribed and asserted identities, 127 then Roman sources leave us well short of the goals of analysis. It is a telescopic vision. Vedic and other ancient
Sanskrit literature gives us considerable insight to Indian society of the first five centuries of the common era; but attempts to integrate Indian and Greco-Roman accounts have met difficulties, if not outright resistance.128 There is little we can know about what Indians thought about themselves
in relation to foreigners, or mlecchas, such as Romans and Greeks, and as a result, a full-scale examination of ethnicity would be seriously hampered
from the outset. Certainly, the recent flood of scholarly attention to ancient
ethnic identities offers many insights to the present project: foremost among
these is the insistence that ethnicity should be perceived in an aggregative manner, involving a set range of criteria, variously combined.129 But this only helps us so far and no further, since the current project does not
focus on groups of people within the Mediterranean, but one far removed
from it. Consequently, the approach adopted here has been to restrict the
investigation largely to the Roman discourse about India.
III. LITERARY FEATURES: MODES OF DESCRIPTION
At this point it is necessary to step back from the details of the texts described and focus on the manner in which those descriptions are made.
This involves consideration of some of the literary tropes that occur in Indographic texts. Important among them, and linked to the recurrent fig- ure ofprofusion that is so central to this chapter, inclusion and omission are a major issue for the writers under discussion. Thus an author occasionally
apologises for providing detailed description, or even for omission of the same. Pliny’s programmatic comment about ‘following in the footsteps of
Alexander’ is significant (6.61), as a reaction to difficulties brought by the
scale of his project of describing the entire universe.130 Clearly, the state- ment cannot be taken literally, in view of the twists and turns ofAlexander’s
Todorov, The conquest ofAmerica: the question ofthe other, tr. Richard Howard (New York: Harper and Row, 1997), pp. 25-8.
127 Richard Jenkins, ‘Rethinking ethnicity: identity, categorization and power’, EthnicandRacialStudies
17 (1994), 199-223, esp. 217-18; cf. Fredrik Barth’s editorial introduction to Ethnic groups and
boundaries (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982).
128 Romila Thapar, ‘Historical consciousness in early India’, in Culturalpasts (2000 [1995]), pp. 155-72, on the tendency of colonial scholars, including William Jones, to present India as ‘ahistorical’.
129 Jonathan M. Hall, Ethnic identity in Greek antiquity (Cambridge University Press, 1997), and
Hellenicity: between ethnicity and culture (University of Chicago Press, 2002), emphasises perceived
linguistic differences within the Greek world.
130 Cf. Chapter 1, section II. 4.
98 Features ofa discourse
itinerary; rather it suggests that the figure ofAlexander provided a structur- ing principle. Marking-off devices, such as the adverb to indicate thus far’ (hactenus),1}1 illustrate the way in which an ethnographic excursus can be
bracketed off. Much of what follows may be regarded as the use of a special metalanguage by which ancient authors organised writing about foreign
peoples.
III. i. The Periplus form As a literary technique the periplus made it possible to describe large expanses of coastline, and goes back to Hecataeus and other early Ionian
writers of prose. 132 By the first century bc it had become a well-established
literary genre, as Pliny’s list of sources in book i shows. Among its many
advantages was its ability to bring the reader along as it proceeded in serial fashion down a coastline. As such, it reflected the fact that sea-travel was
throughout antiquity the quickest and cheapest means of long-distance
travel and transportation. It was most commonly pursued in the form of hugging a coastline, even though open-sea travel now appears more com- mon than was earlier supposed. 133 But the link between genre and travel was to prove restrictive in the case of any land far from the Mediterranean:
it was not intended in the first instance to describe inland areas or open sea.
It was, however, well suited to any substantial body of water that provided,
in the form of its coastline, a major organising principle. 134 As a literary form re-enacting the journey described, the periplus lies behind the broader structure of chorography, going back to Greek history’s Ionian origins and particularly to Hecataeus’ periegesis; even then, this fea- ture is visible in the Odyssey and other early Greek epic. 135 There is something
inevitable about this when the observer himself has done the travelling, or
131 Notably also at 6.220, concluding the five geographical books; cf. also, from that part of the Natural
history, 2.102; 3.1; 3.94; 4.68; 5.73; 6.84; 6.219.
132 On Hecataeus and the periplus form, cf. Chapter 1, section 1 . 2 above. Also, Lesley, Greek literature, pp. 219-20, on the experiences of sea-travel underlying the literary form of the periplus.
133 A. J. Parker, Ancient shipwrecks of the Mediterranean and the Roman provinces (Oxford: Tempus
reparatum, 1992); and Lionel Casson, Ships andseafaring in the ancient times (Austin: University of
Texas Press, 1994).
134 The Periplus of Hanno, Arrian’s early Periplus ofthe Black Sea and the Periplus ofthe Erythraean Sea (which involves a certain amount of open sea, but in the special circumstances of the monsoon) show that the Mediterranean had no absolute monopoly on the genre.
135 Jacoby has divided fragments of Hecataeus’ work by area: FGrH 1 frr. 37-359. The comparison with Homer is of course only a limited one: the prose tradition differs crucially in its loss of the heroic or romance elements. For Karl Meuli, the Odyssey reflects an earlier epic tradition about Jason and
the Argonauts: Odyssee undArgonautika. Untersuchungen zur griechischen Sagengeschichte und zum
Epos (Berlin: Weidmann, 1921).
India described 99
claims to have done so.
136 The periplus of Hanno begins in the third per- son, but within the space of a few sentences adopts the first person (plural), travelogue-style.137 But by the time we get to Pliny the periplus is deeply
ingrained as a paradigm for chorography, so much so that the writer’s own journey is no longer relevant. Earlier in Pliny’s lifetime (c
.
ad 43), Pomponius Mela’s Chorographia had revealed the same principle in a dif- ferent way. He uses third-person narration throughout the work, thereby implying a travelling focaliser without explicitly creating the character of
a traveller. Mela brings his work to an end where the Atlantic meets the Mediterranean, sealing it with a strong closural gesture that is also a kind
of homecoming ( nostos): Farther along are the colony of Zilia, the river Zilia, and Ampelusia, namely
the point from which we began [i.e. 1.26], which turns here into our Strait [of
Gibraltar]: this is the terminus both of the present work and of the Atlantic coast. (3.107)
138 Coming even later in the tradition, Pausanias is an extreme case in so far as the journey itself may be detected in the text, even though the author
himself does not make the claim. 139 Of course, the fact that he confines himself to mainland Greece, with its extensive coastline, makes such a journey all the more practicable: and it has been suggested that all his chorographic material could have been observed in person, with only the
historical sections deriving from written sources. Indeed a striking feature of
Pausanias is the way in which physical places and objects, such as statues, serve for him as a pretext to launch into historical material, which may
include biography or the history of religious practice. This procedure in geographic writing may be contrasted with Valerius Maximus’ Facta et dicta
136 E.g., Hecataeus, and Herodotus in Egypt, esp. 2.99.1. The veracity of Herodotus’ claims is strictly irrelevant to the present discussion, pace Fehling, Herodotus, pp. 240-3, esp. 241).
137 ‘The Carthaginians decided that Hanno should set sail .
. ("ESo^e KapxTlSoviois • • •)• Principally on grounds of language, Blomqvist has dated the work to the classical period rather than the
Hellenistic. He shows how it fits in with early periegetical literature, probably pre-400, linked with
the heyday of Greek colonisation in the Mediterranean and Black Sea; the genre was linked at first with the practical tales of sailors and merchants, but later developed a literary character (esp. 55-6). Contrast Romm, Edges, pp. 19-20, who assumes a Hellenistic date for the Greek translation.
138 ultra est colonia et fluvius Gna et unde initium fecimus Ampelusia in nostrum iam fretum vergens promunturium, operis huius atque Atlantici litoris terminus.
139 Jas Eisner, ‘Pausanias: a Greek pilgrim in the Roman world’, Past and Present 135 (1992), 3—29 has shown how Pausanias constructs his own identity through his travels; yet it is still worth emphasising
that Pausanias appears more implicitly than explicitly in the work, and there is remarkably little first-person narration compared with a modern travelogue. See Pausanias: travel and memory in Roman Greece, ed. Susan E. Alcock, John F. Cherry and Ja£ Eisner (Cambridge University Press, 2001), esp. part 1.
IOO Features ofa discourse memorabilia-, here is also a catalogue of cultural phenomena, but one that
is thematically rather than spatially organised.'40 The periplus is thus one response, and a limited one at that, to a residual problem ofethnographic writing: that ofestablishing order amid a variety of
material. Where to start, how to proceed, where to end? What to include and what to leave out? These questions are not easily solved for writers seeking to integrate new material into well-established genres. The periplus was of limited use in describing India: the Periplus ofthe Erythraean Sea does indeed make use of the form, but it is limited to the coastline, and
does little to go beyond the immediate and limited concerns of commercial
travellers. Let us consider some of the other tropes to arise in Indography.
III. 2. Omission and abbreviation Omission and its twin, inclusion, are recurrent themes in the metalanguage
of Indography. Pliny at various points of the Natural history consistently speaks of omission as something to avoid.'4’ At the beginning of book 7 he says there are too many human mores to cover in detail, and much has
already been said in the preceding books; but some are ‘not to be overlooked’ {baud omittenda), particularly those further from the sea, and he knows some will find these far-fetched (7.6). When Pliny concludes his section on Sri Lanka by saying ‘These things have been established concerning Sri Lanka’ (haec conperta de Taprobane, 6.91), we may well wonder whether the
adjective for ‘all’ {omnia) should be understood as part of the sentence. At
all events, this is a way by which Pliny marks the end ofa description, so the author can move to a different topic, in this case northeastern Iran. After
a lengthy digression on the sea-route between Egypt and India, Pliny reins himself in with the comment, ‘we will return now to our theme’ (6. 106).
142 But essentially the nature of the encyclopaedia is such that digressions are possible within the broader rubric of the subject under discussion. Pliny’s paratactic style lends itself to inclusivity, at the expense of the critical use of sources. The following comment on the seven parallels as a system for dividing up the world offers a comparandum, coming as it does after a different, tri-continental system:
140 Nikolaus Thurn, ‘Der Aufbau der Exemplasammlung des Valerius Maximus’, Hermes 129 (2001), 79-94- 141 OfPliny’s thirty-one instances of omittendum, the gerundive of obligation, the negative non or haut
is used on each occasion: e.g., 4.93; 10.128; 11.239.
142 nunc revertemur adpropositum.
India described IOI To these, furthermore, we shall add another theory of Greek discovery exhibiting
the most recherche acuteness, so that nothing may be lacking in our survey of the geography of the world. (6.211) 143 Pliny’s much-vaunted desire for comprehensiveness is one reason he pro- ceeds with this passage; another is that he finds it intellectually impressive,
as he says emphatically, and he invites his reader to be equally impressed. The following may be noted as a rare instance of Pliny’s admission to having omitted something, on grounds of similarity to what is already
discussed: There are many similar facts besides, which I take care to omit in my account ofthe
several kinds of birds, to avoid [the reader’s] aversion: for example, Theophrastus
states that doves, peacocks and ravens are not indigenous to Asia, nor are croaking
frogs to Cyrenaica. (10. 79)
144 Yet even here, where he claims to omit comparable stories concerning
unusual bird behaviour, he cannot resist mentioning a brief tale from
Theophrastus, so much so that the statement functions as something of a
praeteritiod
45 A notable Plinian praeteritio, on the other hand, is the famous praise of Italy, laus Italiae (3.38—42).
146 He apologises for the brevity with which
he describes the peninsula, and particularly the city of Rome, the ‘world
capital’, Roma terrarum caput (3.38). Italy he must pass over quickly for the sake of his work as a whole, and it is for this reason that he begs his readers’ forgiveness.147 But in fact the praeteritio proceeds at a leisurely pace, and in its course Pliny gives much attention to the beauty of Italy. It
is the nurturing parent of all lands, it gathers, tames and civilises disparate peoples:
I am mindful that I may justly be thought ungrateful and apathetic if I describe so
casually and cursorily a land which is both the fosterling and the mother ofall lands, chosen by the providence of the gods to make heaven itself more glorious, to unite
scattered empires, to moderate manners, to assemble in converse through common
143 his addemus etiamnum unam Graeciae inventionis sententiam (scientiam pars coddj vel exquisitissimae
subtilitatis ut nihil desit in spectando terrarum situ.
144 multa praeterea similia, quae prudens subinde omitto in singulis generibus [avium], fastidio parcens, quippe cum Theophrastus tradat invecticias esse in Asia etiam columbas et pavones et corvos et in Cyrenaica vocales ranas.
145 Cf. 28.151, where he does not bother to list a remedy involving a particular animal since it has become extinct; at 28.180 he passes over a certain kind of lichen because it is pernicious and not
medically useful.
146 On this passage compare Jacques Andr6, ‘La conception de l’fetat et de l’Empire dans la p6ns£e gr£co-romaine des deux premiers sikles de notre £re\ ANRWW.^0.1 (1981), 3-73, at 57.
147 legentes tantum quaeso meminerint ad singula toto urbe edissertanda festinari (3.42).
102 Features ofa discourse language the jarring and rude tongues of so many peoples, to give humankind
civilisation, and in short to become the single fatherland of all peoples throughout
the world. But what am I to do? The great distinction of all its places — and who
could touch on them all? - and the great renown of the various phenomena and
peoples detain me. (3. 40) 148 The two parts of the laus Italiae are Italy’s importance, resulting in part from its central location in the Mediterranean, and its beauty. A list of
its ideal features is given in breathless asyndeton. Saying this after the
rhetorical question, ‘But what am I to do?’ (sed quidfaciam?), Pliny here
feigns helplessness: though unable to go into the level of detail deserved, he is compelled to mention the kinds of thing he could have described: Such life-giving and enduring healthiness, such mildness of climate, such fertile
fields, such sunny hills, such safe pastures, such shady groves, such bountiful kinds of forests, so many mountain breezes, such abundance of fruit, vines and olives.
(3-4i) 149 And so Pliny proceeds for the same length again. We may note the importance of a mild climate, again a sense of Aristotelian ‘middleness’ in this context.150 The renown ( nobilitas) of Italy lies here in the qualities that make it a locus amoenus, rather than in its marvels;151 later on, in book 36, the marvels of Rome are mentioned in the context of architecture rather
148 nec ignoro ingrati ac segnis animi existimari posse merito si obiter atque in transcursu ad hunc modum
dicatur terra omnium terrarum alumna eadem etparens, numine deum electa quae caelum ipsum clarius
faceret, sparsa congregaret imperia ritusque molliret et totpopulorum discordesferasque linguas sermonis commercio contraheret ad colloquia et humanitatem homini daret, breviterque una cunctarum gentium
in toto orbe patriafieret. (3.39) sed quid agam? tanta nobilitas omnium locorum, - quos quis attigerit? - tanta rerum singularum populorumque claritas tenet.
149 iam vero tanta e vitalis ac perennis salubritas, talis caeli temperies, tarn fertiles campi, tarn aprici colies, tarn innoxii saltus, tarn opaca nemora, tarn munifica silvarum genera, tot montium adflatus, tanta frugum vitiumque et olearum fertilitas.
150 E.g., in the seventh book of the Politics (13271518-38) Aristotle reflects the widely current idea that natural character (cf>uais) is determined by climate and locale. People inhabiting Europe and other
cold areas are plucky but lacking in intelligence and skill; as a result, though themselves living
relatively free, they are unable to rule and organise their neighbours. On the other hand (8e) Asians
are intelligent and skilful in temperament but lack spirit, so much so that they are always prone to subjection and slavery. Occupying a middle position geographically (pecteuei), xhegenos of Hellenes
is both spirited and intelligent. As a result it is free and possessed of good political institutions, and
in fact capable of ruling all humanity if it attained political unity. It is clear, however, that Aristotle takes the old connection between locale and character a step further, by exploring the political implications of middleness, esp. ability to rule others. Geographical location and climate are thus a
rationale for the ‘natural’ Asian servility, ungrudgingly accepted, that Aristotle mentions elsewhere
(notably 1285a in the discussion of different types of kingship).
151 A counter-example is provided by Lucan’s description of ‘godforsaken’ Libya, 9.435: temperies uitalis abest, et nulla sub ilia/ cura Iovis terra est. On the virtues of temperies see further Richard F. Thomas,
Lands andpeoples in Roman poetry: the ethnographic tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge Philological
Society, 1982), pp. 11—12.
India described 103 than natural history narrowly defined. Like the praeteritiones in Cicero’s speeches, matters supposedly omitted are in fact emphatically brought to the reader’s or listener’s attention.152 In this way, Italy and Rome receive
textual prominence, but in a different key compared with the marvels of
the edges of the earth. And it is for this reason that Pliny can, in fact must,
pass over the chance to give an Italian ethnography:153 by virtue ofits marvel
element, his ethnographic style is suited more for people of the edges of the
earth than for those of Italy. Yet even here we may detect the submerged
question of perspective in ethnography, Italy as perceived by the Greeks. A small fraction of Italy was significant enough to merit the name Magna
Graecia from the Greeks, smug though they were: ‘the Greeks themselves,
a people hugely given to self-regard, have passed judgment on the land by
giving the name Great Greece to merely a small portion of it’ (3.42).
154 This
disarmingly candid reflection on Greek culture is in effect a reminder of
Pliny’s Hellenistic background, and of the degree to which he is conscious of it. Related to omission is abbreviation. Mela’s brief passage on India (3.61-
71) shows what happens when such a description is abbreviated: within
individual items described, the marvel remains as the guiding principle, but the critique of sources and its debate over truth and fiction are lost in the process of compression. This is largely the fate of late-antique excerpts such as we find in Solinus and Isidore: the marvellous elements continue, while the debates around them have long since fallen by the wayside. The
reasons for this process are varied, whether the familiarity of the material, the practical needs for concision, or the dynamics of transmission.
III.3. Authors and authority A certain kind of authorial presence shines through the accounts of India.
It is not autopsy in the direct sense that has been studied with regard
to Herodotus and Thucydides in Greek historiography.155 Of the writers described earlier in this chapter, only the anonymous author of the Periplus
152 Heinrich Lausberg, Handbuch der literarischen Rhetorik, 2nd edn (Munich: Beck, 1973), pp. 436-7.
153 neque ingenia ritusque ac viros et lingua manuque superatas commemoro gentes (3.42).
154 ipsi de ea iudicauere Grai, genus in gloriam suam effusissimum, quotam partem ex ea appellando Graeciam Magnam (3.42). This adoption of a Greek perspective on Rome is in keeping with
the Hellenistic framework of imperial geographies: Clarke, Between geography and history. It is interesting also to observe, on these lines, that the earliest Latin use of the word barbarus is of the Romans themselves: Plautus, e.g. Cure. 150, Mil. 211, Mostell. 828. See further TLL II. 1735. 53-68 and 1740.40-58. This designation is articulated in Paulus Festus p. 36 Muller.
155 Clarke, ‘Author of Strabo’; cf. Schepens, Autopsie'.
104 Features ofa discourse of the Erythraean Sea and Cosmas claim to have visited India, and then
those claims are muted.156 It is significant that both of these two exceptions are traders. 157 Far more common, for the texts discussed here, is a sense of authority implicit in literary sources cited, notably Onesicritus, Megasthenes and Nearchus. As Chapter i showed, this may be considered
a kind of deflected autopsy, namely the phenomenon whereby texts based on earlier autopsy carry special authority. Ctesias is a notable absence from
this list: indeed, the fact that he never visited India is one of the main
grounds for his consistently negative reputation.158 In this way, autopsy is a key criterion for the ranking of sources. A few instances will suffice to prove the point. Strabo tells us that Megasthenes saw tigers (15. 1.37 C703). But other
travellers were less fortunate. According to Arrian, Nearchus by his own
account saw tiger skins only rather than the live animal (15.1), a remark
that is matched by his having seen the skins only of the gold-digging ants brought into the Macedonian camp.159 The point here is not the veracity or otherwise of the original sources; rather, the extent to which autopsy
is an issue for later authors. What the texts preserve is thus not autopsy
itself but the next best thing available: the sense that their sources have seen phenomena first-hand. Such statements may be taken as a nod toward the power of autopsy as a source of authority, the creation of a kind of autopsy
at one remove. It could well be that autopsy was so familiar by the time
of Strabo and Arrian that variations of the theme could be entertained to similar effect. In Arrian, the phenomenon is doubly deferred: first, neither
a tiger not a gold-digging ant was seen: the skins of dead animals function
as witnesses. Secondly and more importantly, Indian objects were seen not by the authors but their sources, by Nearchus rather than Arrian himself. The ideal of autopsy may be hard to realise in the case of India, but it remains within the purview of writers seeking to validate their accounts with reference to authorities. In so far as autopsy was an issue for ancient
writers, its authority went unchallenged. The theme of autopsy takes an unusual turn in Cosmas’ Christian topography. Given the stigma attached to the mercantile travel in antiquity, it comes as something ofa surprise that Cosmas confidently identifies himself
156 Pliny makes remarkably little of his own visits to those parts of the Mediterranean world that he
did in fact visit while on military duty.
157 On the Periplus author and on Cosmas, see section I above, Cosmas being a former trader.
158 Cf. Chapter i, section 1.4.
159 For a comparandum for this phenomenon in a work that is not easily dated, Hanno the Carthaginian supposedly brought back from his African voyage skins of the ‘gorilla’: in both cases the hides are tokens of proof.
India described 105
as a trader, especially when he has given up commercial travel in order to become a monk. This he does explicitly at 2.54 and 2.56, and implicitly
at several points when he speaks of his own travels.
160 What is more, in describing the natural historical details of book 11, he evaluates most phe- nomena in light of his own experience. Thus he has seen a giraffe and a rhinoceros, both dead and alive. Of the hog-deer, he says bluntly that he
has not only seen but eaten it. 161 Here, in an adaptation of the usual theme, human interaction with an unfamiliar phenomenon takes place through
eating rather than merely sight. 162 Cosmas admits, on the other hand, that he has seen neither a unicorn nor a hippopotamus, though he has seen and sold some of its large teeth. 163 Whereas autopsy is part of Cosmas’
description of India, a much greater source of authority looms over the
Christian topography, namely that of the Jewish and Christian Bibles. 164 While he does mention Christian missions to the Indian subcontinent, he
freely admits that they have not been entirely successful. Not until much later, with the preface to al Biruni’s Indica from the
first decades of the eleventh century, do we find an explicit attack on
autopsy in favour of oral sources and especially of written tradition.165 From a certain point of view, al Biruni’s attack on autopsy, so prominently made in that work, reveals the tenacity of the tradition against which he
argues. But already among Indographers of the Augustan age the dictates of autopsy are broadly interpreted, and necessarily so in the case of distant
India.
III.4. Utopianism and barbarism Commodities coming from India inspired considerable moral comment in Rome, as Chapter 4 will show. To what extent do Roman writers view India
generally through a moralising lens? There is a certain amount of moral
160 He identifies himself as a business traveller when referring to his companion as aKKov Eva TTpayHOTeuTfjv (2.56). Note also the use of the first person in the description of Adulis: ev0a Kai tt)V EpTropiav TToioupsQa oi otto AAe^avSpEias Kai ccrro EAa euttopeuouevoi (2.54). Not only do we
hear of Cosmas the trader but also ofother traders, Roman and Iranian; however, no Indian traders
are explicitly mentioned. See Chapter 4, section III.
161 tov 8e xoipe^a<l>ov Kai eT8ov Kai £<|>ayov.
162 On the importance of autopsy in classical Greek historiography, not least in Herodotus, see esp. Schepens, Autopsie ’. 163 By the same token there is a vivid sense of place, namely Alexandria, as Cosmas’ base. This is clearest in the first prologue to the work; when he says that he has sold hippopotamus’ teeth ‘here’ (svTaOQa), we may well understand him to mean Alexandria.
164 On Cosmas’ bibliocentrism see esp. Wolska, Topographie chretienne.
165 Alberuni’s India, ed. Edward C. Sachau (Delhi: D. K. Publications, 1910), pp. 3-4.
106 Features ofa discourse comment, but nothing to match, say, the overtly anti-Egyptian sentiment
evidenced in Juvenal’s satire on Egyptian cannibalism ( Satire 15) ,' 66 The
mime, P. Oxy. 413, is arguably unmatched in its negative view of Indians,
if we may draw that conclusion from their language and behaviour. It is no accident that this is also the only Indographic text that is palpably of a lower social class than the rest. When, by contrast, Cicero underlines the
barbarity of India - ‘WEat savage land is more uncouth or unrefined than
India?’ - he does so in order to praise the courageousness of Indian sages and widows.167
It seems here that the rhetoric of barbarism and civilisation
is employed not in its own right but as a rhetorical strategy, a means of
using India as a mirror whereby to contemplate Roman failings. Equally, there are a number of references to Indian paideia, which, seen
in context, both prove and disprove the barbarity of India.'
68 Dio Chrysostom’s 53rd discourse, on the subject of Homer, makes the intriguing state- ment that Indians have translated Homer’s poetry into their native language and perform it in that fashion:
It is said that Homer’s poetry is sung even in India, where people have translated
it into their own speech and tongue. (53.6)
169 Even though the people of India do not know the stars of our part of the world, say Dio, they are acquainted with the sufferings of Priam, Hecuba
and Andromache, and the bravery ofAchilles and Hector (53.7). In recounting praise for Homer on the part of the philosophers, Dio is in effect prais- ing Homer himself in this discourse, not least his quality as a teacher. His poems delight and instruct not merely Greek speakers, but are known (in translation) even to those living far afield, who know nothing else of Greek
society. At issue for Dio is not India perse, but the greatest cultural capital of
the Greek world, the Homeric poems; India, by virtue of the considerable
distance it evokes, signifies the power of Homer, and ultimately of Greek
paideia itself.170 Aelian {Var. hist. 12.48), who makes an interesting comparison with ‘Persians’, succinctly makes the same point:
1 66 E. Courtney, A Commentary on the Satires ofJuvenal (London: Athlone, 1980), pp. 590-1.
167 quae barbaria India uastior aut agrestior? (Tusc. 5.77-78).
168 Another indirect reference to India’s paideia is found at Curt. 8.9.15, where a certain tree-bark is seen as useful for writing.
169 ottote Kai rrap’ ’lvSot$ <|>cccnv aheaOai tt\v Opfipou Troir)atv, psTafSaAoVTCov aurriv eis Tpv
CT(|>ETEpaV SidAEKTOV te Kai (|>COvf|V. 170 Froma I. Zeitlin, ’Visions and revisions of Homer’, in Being Greek under Rome: cultural identity, the Second Sophistic and the development ofempire, ed. Simon Goldhill (Cambridge University Press, 2001), pp. 195-266, esp. 203.
India described 107 The Indians rewrite the poems of Homer into their own language and recite them. They are not alone, for the Persian kings do so as well, if we are to believe those writing on these topics. 171
It is difficult to know what to make out ofthis story: certainly, this asserts the
diffusion of what is perhaps the most revered of Hellenic cultural capitals, namely Homer, and with it the breadth of the Greek cultural sphere. In
this respect, Philostratus’ Life ofApollonius ofTyana bears comparison. But beyond that, analysis becomes harder, and we are left wondering whether
this reflects some consciousness, however distorted, of the Sanskrit epic
tradition represented by the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, so central to Indian historical consciousness. 172 Such a suggestion would carry greater weight if it were substantiated elsewhere. At all events, what emerges in these two passages is the sense that India’s spatial distance implies a priori a cultural distance, and it reflects the magnitude of Homer’s achievement
that his poems bridge that distance. But moral comment has another side too: again we come to the prob- lem of utopianism. 173 On the face of it, there is no denying the ideal- ising force of a passage such the following, in which Strabo draws on
Megasthenes:
All Indians eat simply, particularly while on campaign. They take no pleasure in large mobs, and thus keep good order. They abstain for the most part from theft. Megasthenes claims, at any rate, that while he was in the camp of Chandragupta, though in an encampment of forty thousand he did not on any day see reports of
thefts worth more than two hundred drachmae - this among people who use only
unwritten laws. For, he says, they do not know writing, but manage all their affairs from memory: they thrive on account of their simplicity and thrift. They drink no wine except at sacrifices, and then their drink is made from rice rather than
barley. Their meals consist mainly of rice porridge. Their simplicity is attested also
in their laws and contracts, given that they are not litigious. They have no lawsuits concerning mortgages or deposits, and have no need for witnesses or seals, but
trust their associates. Also, their leave they domestic property unguarded. (15. 1.53 C709) 174
171 oti ’lv8oi tt) Tiapa a<f>iaiv Eirixcopico <t>covfj tcx Opfipou pETaypayavTES aSouaiv ou povoi aAAa Kai oi riepacov |3aaiAEis, ei ti xph ttioteueiv toTs uiTEp toutcov iaTOpoOorv.
172 On the role of epic tradition, see for example, Thapar, Culturalpasts, pp. 195-212 and 647-79.
173 See Chapter 1, section III above.
174 EuteAeTs 5e Kcrra tt)v SiaiTav ’IvSol iravTES, paAAov 6’ev tocTs aTpocTEiais’ ouS’oxAgo ttepittco Xaipouai, SiouEp EUKoapoOcn. ttAeiotti S’sKEyeipia TiEpi tccs kAottccs- yEvopEvos yoOv ev tco Zav5pokottou CTTpaTOTTEbco <|>r|aiv 6 MEyaa0EVTis, TETTapaKovTa pupiaScov TTAf)0OUS ISpUpEVOU
prjSEpiav f)pEpav 18eTv dvqvEypEva KAsppaTa uAeiovcov f| SiaKoaicov Spaypcbv a£ia, aypd<J>ois Kai Toah-a vopois xp^nevois. ou5e yap ypappaTa EiSsvai auTous, aAA’ crno pvripris EKaaTa
8ioiKEia0as- suitpayeTv 5’ opcoi 5ia tt)v carAoTTiTa Kai tt^v euteAeiov oTvov te yap ou ttiveiv
108 Features ofa discourse A number of ethnographic themes are presented here in an idealising manner: simplicity, frugality and self-restraint in their life-style generally, not least in their diet; the avoidance of crime, at least serious crime; ignorance of writing; the consequent reliance on memory in their social inter- actions. But Strabo’s idealisation is followed directly by some qualifiers indicating disparagement. Now Indian customs are contrasted with the communal meals of Greek citizens, which are held up as the norm:
Such behaviour [i.e. described in the previous passage] is indeed self-controlled. But nobody could commend their other practices, of always eating on their own
and of not having one standard hour for dinner and breakfast rather than eating
as each one pleases. For eating in the former manner better promotes social and
political life. (15. 1.53 Cyo^))I7S
It should be remembered here that the Athenian symposium and the Spartan mess meal (syssition) were archetypes of social exchange in the Greek world, at least among male citizens. 176
It is clear, then, that Strabo’s
idealisation is limited in scope, applying to some spheres of social life, but
not others. This alone may be regarded as an indication of the problem of
utopias: they do not stand up well to scrutiny; they are utopias in so far as they are distant visions, and on closer inspection they quickly become
problematic. Do the features of Strabo’s India qualify it for the status of a utopia? On
the one hand, there is no mistaking a tendency to idealise within various kinds of ethnographic discourse. Two utopian texts of the early modern
period underline the connection between social ideal and distant place: the main speaker of More’s Utopia, Raphael Hythlodaeus, supposedly accompanied Vespucci on his voyage to the New World. Tomaso Campanella’s
City ofthe sun has its geographical location in the Indian Ocean. Obvious
here are the ethnographic contexts of utopian thought, especially when a utopian tradition is considered in a broader span. Yet, on the other hand, it would be misleading to overemphasise these elements, and to assume that
aAA’ ev Oucriai povov, ttiveiv 8’ octt’ opu£r|s &vtI KpiOivcov cruvTi0evTas- Kai crma Se to ttAeov opu^av elvai po<{>r|Tf)v. Kai ev toTs vopois 8e Kai auppoAaiois t^v aTrAoTpTa eAeyxeo-0ai Ik tou
[xi] ttoAuSikous eTvar oute yap UTro0fiK-ns oute TTapaKaTaOfiKris.elvai SiKas, ou8e papTUpcov
ou8e CTtfjpayiScov auTots 5e!v, aAAa ttictteueiv uapa|3aAAopevous- Kai toc oikoi Se to ttAeov
a<f>poupeTv.
175 TaC/Ta pev 8f] aco^poviKa, T&AAa 8’ oOk av tis 6aro8e^aiTO, to povous 8iaiTacr0ai aei Kai to
pf] piav elvai iraaiv obpav koivt^v Seittvou te Kai apiaTou, ocAA* ottcos EKaorco <j>i Aov irpos yap
TOV KOIVCOVIKOV Ka'l TOV TToAlTIKOV ^lOV EKEIVCOI KpelTTOV.
176 Sympotica: a symposium on the symposium, ed. Oswyn Murray (Oxford: Clarendon, 1990); Nick
Fisher, ‘Drink, hybris and the promotion of harmony in Sparta’, in Classical Sparta: techniques behind her success, ed. Anton Powell (London: Routledge, 1989), pp. 26-50.
India described 109
every ethnography has its idealising side. Strabo’s India is, as we have seen, a utopia up to a certain point only; and More’s and Campanella’s utopias
are far from being utopian in all respects.'77 Moving away from India momentarily, it is hard to read Tacitus’ Germania without giving some weight to the glowing terms with which
he describes German libertas (esp. ch. 37). If this was a major concept in Roman politics and social life,'78 then Germany too is evaluated according
to this criterion, and presented in glowing terms. In describing the long combat between Romans and Germans, Tacitus mentions that there have been heavy losses on both sides, and this leads him to compare other nations with whom Rome has fought:
Neither the Samnites, the Phoenicians, the Spaniards, the Gauls nor even the
Parthians have chastened us more frequently: the freedom of the Germans is more
dangerous than Arsaces’ monarchy. (37)
179 Ethnography, on these lines, carries the potential ofsocial criticism ofhome. That does not mean that lands and people described should constitute an
integrated utopia. A recent account offers a four-part typology: retrospective utopias (e.g., Golden Age myths); utopias of discovery (e.g., Euhemerus’ Panchaia and Iamboulos’ Islands of the Sun); utopias of foundation (e.g., Plato’s
Republic)-, and those of the inaccessible present (e.g., the Isles of the Blest or the Hyperboreans). Faced with such categories, India’s utopian status is at best tenuous. It is not retrospective, for India’s antiquity receives limited recognition only; and India is too distantly located to be foundational.
Instead, Strabo’s description quoted above, particularly his emphasis on
Indian simplicity, resonates with the kind of utopia of the inaccessible present found in the descriptions of the Aithiopians. l8 ° Yet, even in Strabo’s account there is a much weaker utopian element than in, say, Diodorus
Siculus description of Aithiopians (3. 2.1-4). From the above discussion it emerges that utopianism in this ethnographic context has its limits. Utopias, it appears, can have that status as
177 The definition of utopia discussed by Clay and Purvis, Four island utopias, p. 2, stresses that they
are not ‘models of unrealistic perfection’ but rather ‘alternatives to the familiar . . . norms by which
to judge existing societies’.
178 Chaim Wirzubski, Libertas as a political idea at Rome during the late Republic and early Principate (Cambridge University Press, 1950). On the phenomenon of presenting a distant land as ‘the location of Roman virtues’ (in this case libertas in Britain), see Katherine Clarke, ‘An island nation: re-reading Tacitus’ Agricola ’ JRS 91 (2001), 94-112, esp. 106—9.
179 non Samnis, non Poeni, non Hispaniae Galliaeue, ne Parthi quidem saepius admonuere: quippe regno
Arsacis acrior est Germanorum libertas.
180 Clay and Purvis, Four island utopias, pp. 168-75.
no Features ofa discourse long as they are out of reach: though India had at an early stage of Greek
history the makings of a utopia, that status was compromised by various developments (including the writing of texts) that brought it closer and made it more familiar. Certainly, there are elements that can be called utopian, but that does not mean we can readily describe Strabo’s or Pliny’s India as a utopia. Rather, we remain on safer ground by stressing the radical difference of India - a difference informed by its spatial difference, its overall difficulty of access to the Mediterranean world. If religious travel was, in the first instance, travel elsewhere,181 then India was a destina- tion par excellence. In practice, this is the case less often in the religious than in the commercial sphere. India’s utopianism, then is a limited thing;
to identify it in ancient accounts such as that of Strabo is useful mostly
in so far as it emphasises India’s inaccessibility, a phenomenon that kept open the possibility of implicit comparison between it and the Roman
world.
///. y. Narrative space India has already emerged as a space onto which Mediterranean people
could project thought-experiments that sometimes merit the term utopia. In addition, India was good to narrate, in the sense that made possible
certain turns of event in the Greek novel. Travel was central to Iambulus’ account of the Islands of the Sun, islands apparently situated on the sea- route between Aithiopia and India. But the pre-eminent case occurs in Xenophon of Ephesus’ Ephesian tale. At one point the heroine, Anthia, is captured by pirates and taken to Alexandria. Here she is bought as a slave by the Indian king, Psammis
(3 . ii. 2). He intends to ravish her but desists once told that she is a priestess of Isis and must maintain her virginity until she reaches a marriageable
age. It is because ‘barbarians are superstitious by nature’ (3.11.4) that he
acquiesces. Soon thereafter, the bandit Hippothous heads up the Nile, though bypassing Alexandria (4.1.5). In Upper Egypt, ‘near to Ethiopia’, he and his five hundred companions have a field day because ‘there was a large group of traders passing through en route to Ethiopia and India’ (4.1.5). Anthia is on the verge of being shipped from Upper Egypt to India, at the behest of Psammis (4.3.3). She prays to Isis to intervene, to prevent
her from being taken to India, ‘far from the land of Ephesus, far from the remains of Habrocomes’ (the hero, whom she mistakenly thinks has died).
181 Eisner, ‘Greek pilgrim’, 9.
India described hi As if in answer to her prayer, Hippothous apprehends and kills Psammis, and thus obviates her journey to India and ultimately makes it possible for Anthia and Habrocomes to reunite. Heliodorus’ references to luxury goods are in many ways cliched and
typical of Roman imperial references to luxury goods. But even here, the Nile connects the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean. When India occurs
in Xenophon of Ephesus, again it is the Nile which pushes and pulls in each direction. In this story India serves to maximise narrative space. In
the Ephesian tale the mere mention of India invests the story with further, unspecified possibilities, and hence contributes to its suspense.
181 In this way India provides the Greek novel with narrative space.
III. 6. Analogy The issue of translation has many aspects. While those related to (or absent from) the practicalities ofcommercial travel will be considered in Chapter 4, there is another, broader sense in which translation demands our attention, namely translation between different cultures. More often than not, this
is implicit rather than explicit.'83 The principle is a simple but rich one:
the less known becomes intelligible through the better known. In other words, this is a negotiation of the familiar and the unfamiliar, of the known
and the strange (the marvel being an extreme case of the strange). Given
this definition, the ethnographic tropes of inversion and comparison may
thus be considered subspecies of the principle of translation. We see in these modes a number of ways in which writers communicate with their audiences, working within the limits imposed by literary genres and their attendant horizons of expectation. A few examples will suffice to illustrate the principle at work within Indographic traditions. Strabo’s description of India is striking for its persistent comparison with Egypt and Aithiopia, the point of comparison being the Nile valley. By Strabo’s time there was a long-standing precedent for the
transference offeatures between India and Africa, so this should in principle come as no surprise. But what is striking is the persistence of the scheme,
as if it provides Strabo with a framework of explanation.
182 These possibilities are consonant with the kind of monsoon travel described in Chapter 4, section
III. 2 below. Both the hydreumata in the Eastern Desert and the Muziris papyrus are reminders of
the dangers facing a merchant bringing goods from India to the Mediterranean.
183 For example, James Clifford, Routes: travel and translation in the late twentieth century (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997), p. n, ‘assumes that all broadly meaningful concepts, terms such as “travel”, are translations, built from imperfect equivalences’.
H2 Features ofa discourse Another point of ethnographic comparison that has already come up
in this chapter has been between Indians and Scythians. This too can be
easily understood, given the geographical proximity of the two peoples. In the texts examined Scythians are invoked as a way of showing that Indian society has changed, with the help of Heracles and Dionysus, from nomadism to sedentary pastoralism. The Scythians are thus presented as the archetypal nomads, whose lifestyle precedes that of agriculture in a schema of progress; 184 in this context their lifestyle represents the antithesis of civilisation as brought by Alexander: Long ago the Indians, [Megasthenes says], were nomads, like the non-agricultural
Scythians, who wander in their waggons and decamp from one part of Scythia
to another, neither dwelling in cities nor reverencing the gods’ shrines. (Arr. Ind.
7-i)‘85 This comparison turns on a negative mode of description. In fact many
negatives are found in descriptions, on the lines of the following: ‘There are no X among the Indians,’ where X corresponds to some familiar aspect of Greco-Roman life, such as agriculture or slavery. It is standard practice for pastoral nomads to be described in the rhetoric of lack. 186 The background
to this is a Roman sense of its own empire as consisting, in the first instance, of cities. Thus, when the second-century sophist Aelius Aristides gives a speech To Rome, he reveals a provincial’s admiration for the empire’s urban
culture. 187 The following comment by Curtius shows that inversion is a possible mode ofethnographic understanding too: here India inverts nature’s known
and normal pattern. But, oddly, Curtius stresses not the explanatory power
of this principle, but its inexplicability: But in that region the earth so inverts the regular order of seasons that when other
parts become hot with the sun’s heat, snow covers India; and conversely, when
184 Hartog, Mirror ofHerodotus; Arthur O. Lovejoy and George Boas, Primitivism and related ideas
in antiquity (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1935), pp. 287-367; and Brent D. Shaw,
‘“Eaters of flesh, drinkers of milk”: the ancient Mediterranean ideology of the pastoral nomad’,
Ancient Society 13-14 (1982-3), 5-31, on Scythians as ‘typical’ nomads.
185 TrdAai uev 8f] vopaSas eTvai 'IvSous, Kaflaittp Zku0ecov tous oOk apo-rijpas, ot fui rijcnv
ctpd^ijcn trAavcbpEvoi SAAote aAApv Tps 2ku9itis dpEipouarv, oute TToAr|a$ oikeovtes oute iEpa
0ECOV cte|3ovtes.
186 Hartog, Mirror of Herodotus; Shaw, ‘Eaters of flesh’; cf. John Matthews, The Roman Empire of Ammianus (London: Duckworth, 1989), pp. 333-42 on the Huns.
187 On towns and cities as the ‘sinews of empire’, Brent D. Shaw, ‘Rebels and outsiders’, CAH, 2nd
edn (2000), vol. XI, pp. 361—403, at 362. Clifford Ando, Imperial ideology andprovincial loyalty in
the Roman empire (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), presents consensus as crucial to the stability of the empire.
India described 113 other parts become cold, unbearable heat prevails there. There is no reason for this inversion of nature. (8.9.13)
188 Curtius appeals to nature as the norm, in order to show the extent of
India’s divergence. Immediately after this balancing of the known and the unknown, he proceeds to reassure readers that at least the surrounding sea
is like other seas, and despite its name is not unusual in its colour. 189 Again, we see here a delicate negotiation between the known, determined by set patterns of language and literary genre, and the unknown — which is, after
all, the quality that assures the interest-value of a story, even as familiar a story as that of Alexander’s expedition.
III. 7. Fragments Throughout this chapter and the former, fragments have loomed so large as a literary form that they demand detailed consideration. This is opportune,
given that the focus here is on points of reception rather than of origin for many ofthe pieces ofinformation about India. Certainly there is a tendency
in accounts ofIndia towards excerption and towards critical comment about
truth and fiction. 190 Strabo and Pliny, in particular, refer to earlier writers whom they claim to be quoting or paraphrasing, often with evaluative comment. Notoriously, Diodorus is the counter-example here, as one who
avoids discussing or even mentioning his sources.
191 In this, doxography is used as a means ofconveying opinions — as ifconcern with supposed sourcecriticism leads to a process whereby an author divides up the information he
has to hand. In some cases we see a tension between the protracted narrative description and the curious detail, the marvel, which is often subjected to source-criticism - what we might call the doxographic habit. Even this phenomenon is complex: it can by turns allow both critical evaluation and
it can make it possible for a writer to hide behind ‘authorities’. In the purely formal sense, in keeping with Jacoby’s Fragmente dergrieckis- chen Historiker, there is no difficulty in identifying a fragment. By this way
of thinking, a fragment is something the scholar recognises on sight or by
instinct. Yet, on closer examination, things are not so simple as they might
seem. For one thing, Jacoby’s own magnum opus has recently come under
188 sed adeo in ilia plaga mundus status temporum uices mutat, ut, cum aliaferuore solis exaestuant, Indiam
nines obruant, rursusque, ubi cetera rigent, illic intolerandus aestus existat. nec, cur uerterit se natura,
causa.
189 ‘Indeed, the sea that washes it does not differ from others with regard to its colour.’ (8.9.14)
190 Gabba, ‘True history’; cf. Romm, Edges, pp. 95-103.
191 Sacks, Diodorus Siculus; cf. Hornbiower’s introduction to Greek historiography, ed. Hornblower.
H4 Features ofa discourse
fire for its at times deceptively facile reconstruction of lost historians.192 What is more, if we allow ourselves to think in broader terms about the concept of the fragment, we can detect in it some conflicting tendencies. For one thing, we can identify its importance to source-criticism. To follow
the lines of Greenblatt’s analysis of medieval travel-writing,193 one might
say that the source-criticism here reflects the author’s desire to strengthen
his position as an ‘authorizing self, as a dependable source in writing about
material that defies credibility. Yet, in trying to strengthen their own posi- tion by this means, Strabo and Pliny in fact reduce their own texts to a
collection of fragments, and in so doing effectively fragment and hence
reduce the unity of their own writing. Diodorus is the odd one out in this: while his own work draws heavily on earlier sources, he seldom identifies them as such, and in the process he tends not to disrupt his own narrative with an evaluation of sources. In his essay, translated as ‘A lover’s discourse: fragments,’ Roland Barthes
offers a sophisticated analysis of the fragment as a unit of language and
thought. In utterances about the erotic, it is, for Barthes, not so much a matter of individual authors creating their own texts, but more a discourse
collectively created over a period of time. There is, on this analysis, a lover’s discourse that pre-exists any individual love-poet, a discourse prone to
infinite fragmentation and reassembly. 194 Even making provision for obvious and major differences in context,
there might be something to gain here in identifying an ethnographer’s
discourse on the same lines. As for love, so for the ends of the earth, and not
least India: in each case, there is a significant degree of repetition ofthe same
kinds of phenomenon. The marvel is a prime example: familiar already by
the time ofCtesias, it was to be much written about in Hellenistic times, and
will have been cliched by the time of Strabo and Pliny. Given the folkloric nature of the marvellous creatures, they might seem to constitute exactly the kind of discourse that lacks an original author and allows for repeated borrowing and reworking. In these ways the ethnographic discourse about
India has a striking degree of openness, of iterability and malleability. Its resilience over many centuries comes, then, as no surprise. The fact that
192 See esp. the essays by G. W. Bowersock, ‘Jacoby’s fragments and two Greek historians ofpre-Islamic
Arabia’, and Guido Schepens, ‘Jacoby’s FGrHisr. problems, methods, prospects’, in Collectingfragments, ed. Most, pp. 173-85 and 144-72; cf. Chapter 1, section III.7 above.
193 Stephen Greenblatt, Marvelouspossessions: the wonder ofthe New World (University ofChicago Press,
r 99 1 ) , PP- 48-9, following de Man, on Mandeville: ‘There is no original, no authorizing self, no
authentic text; all texts are translations of/ fragments that are themselves translations.’
194 This approach has been adopted in a recent study of Latin love-elegy: Duncan F. Kennedy, The arts oflove: five studies in the discourse ofRoman love elegy (Cambridge University Press, 1993).
India described ii5 Indographic discourse overlaps to such an extent with descriptions of other remote places, especially Aithiopia and to a lesser extent Egypt (thus Strabo)
,
made it both more flexible and durable, and more intelligible to its audience,
especially when accompanied by discursive comparisons.
Pliny’s account is an extreme but not a unique case of inclusivity as a principle: it is as if there were no limits on what might be included in the Natural history, given its enormous scope, and no limits to what might
be included on any one topic discussed. He himself sounds an apologetic note in the preface, admitting that much more could have been added on
any given topic. 195 Pliny’s tendency to criticise sources must thus be seen
as an author’s attempt to gain some purchase on this inclusive principle. Thus for Pliny it was more important to repeat Ctesias’ judgements than to agree or disagree with its substance, to approve or disapprove of its source. The reliability of any item of information seems outweighed by the need to invoke an authority. In such cases it seems better to include bad information than to omit it entirely. The Natural history is a mish-mash of material, composed from within and for a learned milieu already familiar with some degree of the material discussed (at least some of the names invoked as authorities), and alert to
critical debate. It is obvious then that the work should be understood in terms of the learned culture that produced it, where, contrary to modern
expectations, book-learning was more valued than autopsy. 196 The copying
of earlier writers serves a useful purpose: in a society where the copying of
literary texts was a laboursome and expensive business, the encyclopaedia
served an important function in ensuring the survival of such information and making it more widely available. The same is true in later antiquity for the compendium and epitome. To see only the limitations of the fragment would be to overlook its creative potentialities. Most importantly, we should see the fragment as a
rhetorical mode, one that offered a number of possibilities: the chance to reshape geographical discourse into new forms, the chance to offer critique of earlier writers on any given subject.
Ifwe bear in mind Pliny’s text particularly, the history of reception speaks volumes for the power of these possibilities. Pliny’s Natural history itself a compilation of doxae from a huge number of sources, as the lists of sources making up his first book make plain. Yet the fate of the work was, as we
saw above, to be transmitted differently between one section and the next,
195
‘I freely admit that my work is open to considerable elaboration’: praef. 28, cf. 12.
196 Lloyd, Science, folklore and ideology, pp. 140-52; Murphy, Pliny, p. 53.
ii 6 Features ofa discourse and to be excerpted. As we trace the metamorphoses of the same kinds of
material over the centuries, the fragment emerges as the highest common
denominator, a unit for the transmission of information. In the case of
Pliny, the subsequent history of textual reception bears out the essentially fragmentary quality of the work. Why should Pliny be so concerned to debate with authorities? In principle, two explanations may be offered: one stressing the power of existing
tradition, and the other stressing his need to establish his own place among
learned authorities. The two need not clash. Certainly there is no denying that Pliny was aware of the power wielded by scholarly tradition on
any of his topics, as is shown by his care in providing the list of sources
(auctoritates) for each of his 36 books. Yet this does not preclude a sense of his own novelty and enterprise in writing a work as compendious as the Natural history. Given the popularity ofAntiquitates rerum humanarum
et divinarum, Varro alone among Latin writers may have cast a powerful shadow over Pliny’s enterprise, but other than that it is hard to imagine
that any other Latin work matched the breadth and scale of the Natural
history.
III. 8. Closure The question of closure in classical literature has most often been examined
in relation to verse, yet it is an interesting feature of the texts under discussion. 197 In chorography it is significant to observe, in particular, instances where a description ends at a geographical point which marks a border of
knowledge, a point at which nothing more is known definitely or at all. In Chapter 1, Alexander’s campaign emerged, more in analytical hindsight than in actuality, as central to the creation of just such a supposed border of knowledge. Strabo speaks of the Hypanis as a frontier of knowledge,
while admitting that after Alexander Greeks travelled farther east (15. 1.27 C698).198 Later he even says that the land beyond the Hypanis is generally agreed to be the best (15. 1.37 C702).
This principle of ethnographic closure can be paralleled in Mela and in Tacitus. 199 In an Indian context, we need look no farther than a work that does not participate in the learned tradition ofPliny and Strabo, the Periplus ofthe Erythraean Sea. Its end is markedly indeterminate: ‘What lies beyond
this area, because of extremes of storm, bitter cold, and difficult terrain and
197 Deborah H. Roberts, Frances M. Dunn and Don P. Fowler (eds.), Classical closure: reading the end
in Greek and Latin literature (Princeton University Press, 1997).
198 Cf. Arrian Ind. 4.1 and 6.1. 199 Mela, see section I above.
India described 117
also because of some divine power of the gods, has remained unexplored
(dv£p£uvt|Ta)’ (66). The text does retail information about India’s south- west coast beyond Nelkynda and about the east coast, but it does so briefly and with less detail. Characteristic of the work’s pragmatism, it says little about parts that were hardly known to its author, and presumably of little direct relevance to its primary audience. The basic closural gesture bears comparison with that of Tacitus’ Germania (46): The rest is fabulous: that the Hellusii and Oxiones have the mouths and faces of humans but the bodies and limbs of animals. But I shall leave undecided that which is unknown. 100 Moving ever farther north, Tacitus describes Suebia, then the wild Fenni,
characterised by ‘remarkable barbarism and appalling poverty’, before reaching this ending. In the endings of both the Periplus and the Ger- mania this concluding suspension of comment is all the more significant
for the amount of detail that precedes them. 201