
CONCLUSION
 
A number of important recent works have inquired into the influence of
Indian culture on Greco-Roman. 218 In the religious sphere recent decades have seen, for example, Sedlar’s exploration of the links and influences of
Indian religion on Gnosticism. 219 The wide-ranging, valuable and more
circumspect work of Halbfass also goes to some lengths in its use of
217 For the difficulties involved in interpreting asceticism across cultural boundaries, see Wimbush and
Valantasis, Asceticism.
218 Representative of the tendency to interpret similarities as borrowing is David Kamos, ‘On Apollonius, Pythagoras and the Jaina vision’, in Ionian philosophy, ed. K. J. Boudouris (Athens: International Association for Greek Philosophy, 1989), pp. 211-17.
219 Cf. E. Conze, ‘Buddhism and Gnosis’, in Further Buddhist studies (Oxford: Cassirer, 1975), pp.
15-32.
306 Contexts ofa discourse
this approach. In this chapter issues of influence have been avoided as intractable, or at best speculative, in favour of a more limited scrutiny of Roman culture. While Greek and Roman sources frequently spoke of cultural influence in terms of parentage, such claims tend to be problematic and subject to specific and distorting agendas. These ancient paradigms
of cultural interaction tend often to be suspiciously linear and unidirectional. Instead, the set of questions I have pursued here are more geared
to those aspects of Greco-Roman culture which were addressed by ‘India’.
It seems more feasible to ask: What did India mean to Romans? (Again,
in examining mostly sources of the Roman principate and empire, we find
that the basic features go back to early Hellenistic times; again there is the doxographic problem.) In the end, the inquiry into Roman literary images of Indian wisdom or Indian holiness is an inquiry into the closely related questions, how did Roman culture react to India?; and how did Roman
culture construct India? This chapter, which set out in the first instance to examine Brahmans, has moved far and wide. Its breadth of focus has been necessary to understand
the impression they made, and to outline some of the issues involved in
their status as bearers ofholiness. If it has been necessary to consider wisdom
and holiness together, that zeugma should be seen as a feature of Greco- Roman conceptions of Indian sages. No one will deny that the Hellenistic period witnessed radical changes in the politics of knowledge. At a time of increased specialisation and professionalisation (a process going back to
Aristotle and the Lyceum, and even earlier to the emergence ofthe Sophists), Near Eastern cultures appeared to honour special kinds ofknowledge. If, to return to our earlier definition, wisdom is mystified knowledge, then these
eastern kinds of wisdom remained pure for the reason that they seemed immune to the demystification that accompanied the Sophistic movement
and the specialisation of Hellenistic science. Like Chaldaeans and other Near Eastern bearers of wisdom, the Brahmans offered the Hellenistic and
later the Roman world the nostalgic opportunity to reinvent wisdom. But
the effective failure to recognise the existence of Indian astrology saved the Brahmans from the negative Christian view of Chaldaean and Babylonian wisdom.
In an influential analysis of the Oedipus legend, J.-P. Vernant220 speaks of the pervading ambiguity of Oedipus’ character in Sophocles’ Oedipus
tyrannus: he is by turns at the lowest and highest social position, rescuer
220 ‘Ambiguity and reversal: on the enigmatic structure of Oedipus Rex , in Jean-Pierre Vernant and
Pierre Vidal-Naquet, Myth and tragedy in ancient Greece (New York: Zone, 1988), pp. 113-40.
Wisdom 307 from and cause of the plague — these and other contradictions are tied up with his position, from birth, as an outsider to Thebes (though one
originating, it is true, from within). After all, if spatial separation marks
out something or someone as sacred, then that same separation can just
as easily impart pariah status. A comparable ambiguity of the outsider can be found in differing views of the Brahmans, alien sages par excellence. The parrhesia linked to their marginal status made it possible for them to express social criticism in ways which Cynic philosophers would have found commendable. In this way they were real bearers ofobjectivity. On the other hand, their behaviour, and particularly their propensity for suicide by fire, was dangerously close to the exhibitionism of Cynic sages. The figure of Calanus is a prime case of alien wisdom run wild, and in fact attracting varied responses: for Alexander in the Alexander romance this was an heroic
act ofendurance, whereas for Dandamis in Palladius it showed a lack ofself- control, a dubious exhibitionism. Problems of this kind were, in general, very close to the ambiguity of the Cynic sage himself, if we consider their reception in late antiquity; or of the most extreme types ofholy people, who
were eventually to cause the church to promote monasticism as a means
of exercising control over problematic would-be Anthonys. Ultimately, the behaviour of such people was both the crowning glory of the Christian
faith, way beyond the time of the Great Persecution, and it was also a
potential danger to society. In sum, two features of the Brahmans should be emphasised in the
profile that has emerged in the foregoing pages: first, their position on
the margins of society, exaggerated by ethnic difference and geographical
location; and, second, their indifference to paideia, in which respect they seemed to obviate a major problem faced by Christianity as it reached
the higher social strata, namely the ongoing, often troubled attraction of
classical paideia to aristocratic Christians such as Jerome and Augustine. Both of these were part of their image as social critics, and even reinforced
it. In this regard they came, in late antiquity, to resemble by turns the Cynic sage and the Christian holy man. Of these ethnographic features, the second could conceivably have turned out differently, had Hellenistic Greeks shown greater interest than they did in learning the languages of
their neighbours. 221
221 Momigliano, Alien wisdom, pp. 8 and 149.
Conclusion:
Intersections ofa discourse
I. MUTATIONS OF INDOGRAPHY
It is the imagination that has received the greatest prominence in this account. From a Roman point ofview, India remained an ‘oneiric horizon’
(to borrow the subtitle of Jacques le Goffs classic essay), a moveable site of exotic fantasy that drifted in and out of focus at different times and in different contexts . 1 Nonetheless, four broad phases of Indography can be
identified. The following periods are offered despite the abiding practical problem of distinguishing earlier authors from the contexts in which they
are preserved. The first two belong, strictly speaking, to the prehistory of our topic: in these, spanning the archaic to Hellenistic periods of Greek
literature, all the evidence is or originally was in Greek. But these two phases covered in Chapter i shaped the subsequent history of Indography.
i. In the Achaemenid phase, Greek images of India were formed in close
relation to the Iranian world. This period deserves some emphasis in the
history of Indography, since it has tended to be overlooked in favour of post-Achaemenid developments. We should not forget that when Scylax of Caryanda became the earliest Greek person known to have travelled to India, he travelled at the behest of Darius I. Furthermore, Herodotus’
description, the earliest account to survive in a complete text, is part of
a survey of Darius’ satrapies. There are strong hints that the Achaemenid
empire was the original setting of Indography; elements that were later embroidered and expanded upon were initially gathered here. Even ifdetails were not filled in until later, this is where a basic framework of knowledge
emerged. Starting with Ctesias, the marvel was to prove a major part of
Indography, though at this stage expressed by verbal rather than visual
1 Jacques le Goff, ‘The medieval west and the Indian Ocean: an oneiric horizon’, in his Time, work and culture in the Middle Ages (University of Chicago Press, 1980), pp. 189-200; cf. Monique MundDopchie, ‘L’invention de l’lnde merveilleuse. Structures de l’imaginaire et d£couverte de 1 ’Autre
lointain’, in Inde, Grece ancienne, ed. Jean-Claude Carri£re et al. (1995), pp. 99-112. 308
The making ofRoman India 309 means. The marvel, linked as it was with questions of truth and fiction, was to have special significance in historiography as well as the novel. On the other hand, Herodotus’ account contains no mention ofmarvellous people. This contradiction suggests that there was no well worked-out discourse about India in the classical period of Greek literature; even, perhaps, that India carried no special significance to the Greek world at this time.
2. Once Alexander’s expedition brought Greek and Macedonian troops
to the Indus Valley, this was to change significantly. The expedition and its immediate aftermath considerably fleshed out the picture that had already emerged. But most importantly, this Hellenistic period reveals greater interest in distant lands generally, as well as greater interaction between Greek and non-Greek people of Asia. To a substantial degree, later writers were
to look back on the expedition as the formative moment in Greco-Roman
Indography, though in practice its elements were already familiar before- hand. The repertoire of monsters and marvellous people, already known
to Ctesias, expanded considerably in this period. This was the time of
Megasthenes, who, travelling just a few years after Alexander, was held up
by several writers as an authority. With Megasthenes the question of truth and fiction came to be centred on autopsy. His mixed reputation in later times rested on contradictory principles: firstly, the marvellous nature of
the material aroused many suspicions; secondly, the fact that he visited the court ofChandragupta Maurya lent him a high degree of credibility. This is also the period in which wisdom and holiness became key themes in Indography, stemming from Alexander’s interview with the ‘naked philosophers’.
In one way or another, it was Alexander that was to cast a long shadow
over subsequent accounts of India. In historical terms it is important here
to emphasise an aspect of Alexander’s expedition that the sources leave
implicit: its continuities with the Achaemenid world. Indeed, it can be argued that in the geographic reach of his expedition Alexander was highly aware of the extent of the Achaemenid empire.
3. The Roman phase is characterised above all by the doxographic habit, by which writers on India appealed to their Hellenistic and even earlier predecessors. Often this was expressed amid the critical evaluation of dif- ferent sources. The period ofAugustus saw a substantial amount of rhetoric about empire: one of the functions of India was to provide a marker for the easternmost point of the Roman empire, just as it had marked the
eastern limit of Alexander’s expedition. In the eminent case of Trajan, standing at the head of the Persian Gulf, imperial ambitions were readily focused on Alexander. The rhetoric of imperial grandeur should more
readily be understood in terms of the self-presentation of Roman emperors,
3io Intersections ofa discourse
I have argued, than strategic military policy. Whenever Alexander was mentioned in such rhetoric, India was the most obvious symbol of his achievements. This was also the time ofheightened commercial contact, mostly through
the monsoon route but also via the Persian Gulf and then across land to the Mediterranean. About the dynamics of these exchanges we can make
some reconstruction from the varied evidence, archaeological, documentary and literary. It made remarkably little impact on Indography, but it was not completely without effect. Pliny’s Natural history and even Strabo’s Geography may rely in the first instance on book learning in their construction of authority; but they are by no means innocent of the new infor- mation brought by traders at this time, even if long-standing prejudice
against traders brought disparaging comments from them on the subject. Rather, they reveal the combination of various strands of topographic and
geographic knowledge. Perhaps surprisingly, it is the most technical and
scientific of the imperial-age works concerning territorial space, namely
Ptolemy’s Geography, that makes the most obvious use of information only
lately acquired in a commercial context. This would seem the best way
to explain Ptolemy’s knowledge of the Bay of Bengal. With the exception of Ptolemy, awareness of trade links with India was principally focused on the moral implications of Roman consumption, and reflected a Romecentred perspective. But occasionally there are references to India itself as a place of luxurious consumption and its attendant immoralities (discussed below in relation to Curtius Rufus). In a few cases, this moralising view was contrasted with the mystifying sense of India as a place of wisdom and
holiness.
4. The Christian phase of Indography rests heavily on an appropriation of the Augustan discourse about empire. This we see especially clearly in the
early fifth-century world history by Orosius which, tellingly, begins with
a description of the world. But it also contains traces of the very different discourse about Christian mission. The Macedonian’s plea, ‘Come and
help us’, in Paul’s dream (Acts 16:10) was to have obvious implications for India, not only for its remoteness, but also for the tenacity of its religious traditions centred on Brahmans and Gymnosophists. Awareness of these charismatic individuals brought a sense that India needed more substantial and urgent missionary activity. This is expressed in the apocryphal Acts of
Thomas. Philostratus’ Life ofApollonius is an important work for this later phase of Indography, for its polytheist agenda apparently gives powerful
evidence for Christian thinking about religious travel: it appears to be at the very edge of debates between polytheists and Christians.
The making ofRoman India 311 The later Roman empire witnessed substantial interest in Indian wisdom. Much of this can be attributed to an ongoing fascination with Alexander, among both polytheists and Christians. But this fascination was more
notional than the result of actual contact. Archaeological evidence suggests
a slump in commerce in the third century ad. Though the late fifth and
sixth centuries were to see something of a revival, as Cosmas Indicopleustes shows, it was never again to reach its apogee of the first two centuries ad. But by this period, nonetheless, India was already established in the mental
matrix represented in the world maps of Orosius and Isidore, maps that were to have a profound influence on western medieval cartography. Its place at the far eastern edge was ensured by a number of related factors:
its link with the earthly paradise, the persistence of the Alexander legend, and the need to balance the Pillars of Hercules on the western edges of the T-O schema with India on the eastern edge.
II. READERS, SPEAKERS AND POPULAR XENOLOGY
In order to give greater concreteness to the pattern described above, let us consider a passage that crystallises many of its issues, pointing both forward and backward in time. It serves also to summarise the concerns of this book
as a whole.
Curtius Rufus interrupts his narrative of Alexander’s campaign to offer an excursus about India (8.9.1—36). Unlike Arrian’s lengthier Indica, this description is integrated into the history itself and shares its concerns and techniques. Assuming that Curtius was writing in the early years of
Claudius’ reign, we may fit him into the third, Roman phase of Indogra- phy outlined above; yet he should also be seen alongside the Alexander romance tradition, which was to have a textual diffusion of extraordi- nary complexity, involving several different languages, in the early centuries ad. Hence he looks forward, as a Latin writer about Alexander,
also to the very substantial medieval tradition shared by many Christian
writers.
Earlier, a distinction was made between texts in which India is central and
those in which it is referred to merely in passing (introduction to Chapter 2). One of the several significant points about the Curtius passage is that it challenges that pattern: on the one hand, the Indian episode was by any
account tremendously important to Alexander’s expedition, and hence its significance to his narrative as a whole; on the other hand, this is merely an excursus, standing outside the narrative flow of the work, rather than a prime concern.
312 Intersections ofa discourse The passage has all the marks of a colourful and complex piece of Indography. Curtius begins with a description of the geographical orientation of India (chapters 1—2), before moving on at some length to rivers (4-
11). Some natural historical details of flora and fauna are presented, some
as divergences from nature (12-19). From land to people: the remaining
chapters are devoted to Indian ‘manners and customs’, including an account of their taboo of tree-violation (34) and their astronomical pursuits (33, 35-
3 6). A feature that marks out this description from others is the amount
of attention given to the Indian king (23-30), whose lifestyle is presented
in morally loaded language as a case of intentional luxuria exceeding the
vices of all other peoples (23). A lengthy description of the king’s life of
luxury, which includes the conspicuous use of gold, silver, precious stones and aromatics, reaches a crescendo with his exploitation of women:
The women cook food and pour wine, something that is copiously consumed by all Indians. Courtesans, calling on the gods ofthe night with a traditional incantation, take the king to bed once he is lulled by wine and sleep. (8.9.30)
2 This is the very point at which Curtius uses strongly loaded moral lan- guage in making the transition from one kind of ethnographic language to another: Who would expect to find concern for wisdom among these vices? There is a wild and boorish group they call Wise Men.3 As in Cicero,4 Indian virtue and Indian barbarism are mentioned in the same breath, almost as if one is dependent on the other. This we might call the paradox of alien wisdom. Both virtue and barbarism are most clearly seen at a distance, and from this point of view imply radical difference between Indians and Romans. A number of features align this description with others. Winter and summer occur, as it were, in reverse order: here is the principle of inversion or Verkehrte Welt. It is a travesty of nature that brooks no explanation: ‘there
is no reason why nature inverts itself’ (13). 5 In this way, India’s profound
strangeness is also a means of understanding it. By the same token, there are a number of comparisons, explicitly with the Nile of Egypt (9) and with the animals ofAfrica (17); implicitly perhaps with Persian hunting (28), Arabian unguents (27) and Babylonian or Chaldaean astronomy (35-36). Ifthat were
2 feminae epulas parant; ab isdem uinum ministratur, cuius omnibus Indis largus est usus. regem mero somnoque sopitum in cubiculum pelices referunt patrio carmine noctium inuocantes deos.
3 quis credat inter haec uitia esse sapientiae? unum agreste et horridum genus est quod Sapientes uocant.
4 Tusc. 5.77-78, discussed at Chapter 2, section II.3. 5 nec cur uerterit se causa natura.
The making ofRoman India 313 not enough, there is a hint of the question of the limits of knowledge, for the description of rivers ends with a reference to the many watercourses
that are ‘not known’ (ignobiles, n). There is an aphoristic formulation of
the familiar Hippocratic idea of environmental determinism: ‘in their case, as usually happens, the lie of the land shapes the talents of people’ (20).
6 All these features are familiar from the foregoing discussion. But the excursus differs from many other Indographies in one important aspect: at no point does Curtius mention his sources. This omission is, to a degree, a
feature of Curtius’ style, just as it is of Diodorus Siculus’. However, it does
point us in the direction of a major context for the production and circu- lation of information about India: the rhetorical tradition, particularly as manifested in the suasoria. Historical topics were certainly a staple of higher
training in rhetoric. But it is necessary here to understand the term historical in a loose manner: ‘the imaginary themes [plasmata) of the declaimers
are set vaguely in the classical past. Sometimes the mere addition of names
turns them into a sort of rudimentary fiction.’7 Of 350 surviving Greek
declamations with historical topics, some twenty-five involve Alexander,
the Persian and Peloponnesian wars being the other favourite topics. There
can be no doubt that Curtius was influenced by the tradition of the Roman
rhetorical schools, not merely in his speeches but in the dramatic quality of his writing generally. 8 Nor is Curtius alone in this. In various genres, historical exempla were
cited as a matter of course to prove a particular point. For example, the commonplace that ‘nobody is without vice’ is proven by the fact that Cato
lacked moderation, Cicero steadfastness, and so on.9
It is noteworthy that the first suasoria of the elder Seneca is addressed to Alexander, urging him
not to sail the outer Ocean after traversing India. The geography implied by this is of course counter-factual when compared with the Alexander
historians. Valerius Maximus also makes use of Alexander in a number of
different contexts.
10 It is in cases such as these that we glimpse how ideas
6 ingenia hominum, sicut ubique, apud illos locorum quoque situsformat.
7 D. A. Russell, Greek declamation (Cambridge University Press, 1983), p. 106; cf. Marrou, History ofeducation, pp. 202-3; Robert A. Raster, ‘Controlling reason: declamation in rhetorical education
at Rome’, in Education in Greek and Roman antiquity, ed. Yun Lee Too (Leiden: Brill, 2001), pp. 317-37*
8 E.g., Elizabeth Baynham, Alexander the Great: the unique history of Quintus Curtius (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1998), pp. 15-56.
9 Stanley F. Bonner, Roman declamation in the late Republic and early Empire (Liverpool University
Press, 1949), pp. 61-2.
10 1.8 ext. 10 on Alexanders interview with Calanus. Otherwise India is worthy of mention on the subject of sati (2.6.14), for the Indians’ powers of endurance (3.3 ext. 6) and their longevity (8.13 ext. 5) Valerius Maximus’ work ‘provided a stock of rhetorical illustrations and in its treatment of
314 Intersections ofa discourse about India were inculcated into the minds of young Romans and thereby
naturalised. In this regard, it is not amiss to underline the related concepts of practice and everyday life, in view of both the breadth and the depth of
their impact on Roman lives.
11 This leads to the broader question that has all the features of the chicken and the egg: did Alexander account for Greek and Roman interest in India, or conversely was it India’s enormity and remoteness that informed Alexander’s reputation? This would be differently answered, depending on the kind
of evidence examined. But it would seem reasonable to conclude that the
reputations of Alexander and India were to some degree mutually constituting. True enough, there is much in the Indographic profile that does not
necessarily have to be linked to him; but in practice much did, including
the myths about Dionysus and Heracles. Fragments emerged as a lowest common denominator in the examination of historians, geographers and natural historians, reflecting the need to appeal to authorities.11 What we see here is a variation on the same principle, or perhaps even its antithesis. Extemporaneous public speaking on a topic such as India necessarily drew on a common fund of information shared by
speaker and listener; by the same token, it provided the stimulus to fabricate material that would be appropriate to the context ofany speech. Fabrication could be done on the basis also of other ethnographies, as we sense in Curtius’ use of the comparative mode discussed above. The common fund
of ethnographic discourse provided the material for a constant and flexible dialogue between India’s strangeness and its capacity to be known. To be
sure, this aspect of Roman rhetorical practice makes it difficult, or even
unnecessary, to distinguish between producing and conveying information about India. In such cases, the two processes were combined in the practice of a speaker. To focus on Roman practice is to broaden the question of mapmindedness. As we saw in Chapter 5, strong cases have variously been made
that the Romans conceived ofspace in terms of itineraries or provinces; that they relied mainly on verbal or visual representations thereof. 13 The case of
this material demonstrated the various rhetorical shapes an exemplum could take and the ways to introduce, join, and conclude such stories.’ Martin W. Bloomer, Valerius Maximus and the rhetoric ofthe new nobility (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992), p. 2.
11 Two important articulations are Pierre Bourdieu, Outline ofa theory ofpractice, tr. Richard Nice (Cambridge University Press, 1977); and Michel de Certeau, The practice ofeveryday life, tr. Steven
F. Rendall (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984).
12 Chapter 2, section III. 7.
13 Thus, with markedly different emphases, Whittaker, Rome and its frontiers, pp. 63-87, and Talbert, ‘Rome’s provinces’; Brodersen, Terra cognita, and Talbert, ‘Cartography and taste’.
The making ofRoman India 315 Curtius’ extract reminds us of the platitudinous manner in which visions of India were regenerated, with little interest in the addition of new infor- mation. Such practice of rhetoric was the means by which children learned about the orbis terrarum and their place in it, sometimes with the help of
visual cues. 14 Nor is rhetoric purely an issue in the western Mediterranean: declamation was a major part ofthe Second Sophistic in the Greek east also. What we do see is that India was relevant to topics related to Alexander,
to Rome’s imperial grandeur, and often to the two in combination. The
Peutinger map shows that such information could be represented visually, and that Alexander was sometimes part of those representations. Indicat- ing both ports and the roads, the Peutinger map forms an obvious contrast with the Periplus and its coast-hugging route. Certainly Strabo, Pliny and
Ptolemy give much greater prominence to coastal locations in covering
peninsular India, whereas the Alexander historians present northern over- land routes, but the overall point is clear: a variety of travels underlie such
representations, and it is important to grasp the resulting coexistence of
different kinds of geographical information underpinning any one such
text or map. Ideas of India can clearly be traced in both the verbal and
visual dimensions. The verbal far outweighs the visual in terms of surviv- ing evidence, but nonetheless there are signs that the Romans did have a more developed tradition of visual maps than is sometimes supposed. To
take the one example of a depiction of India, the Peutinger map, it appears
that its presentation was geared more to an overall effect than to practical
utility, even if actual travels ultimately underlie its production.
III. IMPERIAL MEMORIES OF ALEXANDER
The history of Indography in section I above proceeds in terms of the experience ofactual travellers between the Mediterranean and the subcontinent.
Yet the rhetoric discussed in section II, constituting the everyday practice of Romans, is of a different order of experience: less direct but more widely
shared by the vast majority of Romans who did not themselves make the
journey, but nonetheless were imaginatively engaged with the exotic effects of India. In recognising the difference between these registers of geographic
information, it is useful to use a study of social memory: Wickham and
Fentress draw on psychological studies to distinguish between episodic memory and semantic memory. The first of these is linked to specific learning episodes, whereas the second is tied to shared knowledge rather
14 Panegyrici Latini 9.20.2-9.21.3 Mynors.
3i 6 Intersections ofa discourse than specific experiences necessarily. 15 Significantly, this distinction serves
as a reminder of just how few persons would, in the course of a lifetime, make the journey from Italy, or any other part of the Mediterranean, all the way to south Asia. One such person would likely have been the Periplus author, to read between the lines of that text, and then even he probably
started only in the Nile valley. Furthermore, there is no apparent evidence of south Asians in Rome, however cosmopolitan the city may have been by the first century ad. 16 For the vast majority, the stay-at-homes, on the other hand, representations of India would have functioned at the level of
semantic memory. The shared knowledge of semantic memory was most
obviously transmitted in the kind of rhetorical education discussed above.
In his varied guises, Alexander is a figure that spanned the distinction: the semantic memory of India was contingent on his supposed experience. This we have seen in each of the three contexts of Indography: most obviously
in that of empire and wisdom, for it was only with his expedition that the Indian sages are reported in Greek sources. Most surprising in this regard is the context of commodities. Yet this too is clear when Pliny in his Natural
history describes particular trees in relation to the expedition (12.21, 24;
cf. 13.3). Pliny’s learning certainly embraced the Alexander historians, but
it is particularly striking to note the references to Alexander in two texts related to the long-distance exchange of goods: Periplus 41 and 47 and the
briefer Parthian stations (as a city-founder: FGrH 781 F2.1). 17 Though the
earliest surviving Alexander histories connect him with the sages, texts of
the Second Sophistic present Alexander himself as a sage: Philostratus’ Life ofApollonius and Plutarch’s On thefortune ofAlexander. This is part of the broadening scope of the image of Alexander in the Roman empire, and
prepares the way for the medieval image of Alexander the pilgrim. In the Middle Ages his spiritual aspects come to predominate over his political and military leadership, as is evident in the Hereford map.
If we take Alexander as a symbol of empire, we quickly see that the imperial context embraces other registers of geographical knowledge: it would thus be wrong to think that the three contexts of Indography are
fully parallel to each other. Beyond this consciousness of Alexander, there
15 James Fentress and Chris Wickham, Social memory (Oxford: Blackwell, 1992), p. 20, drawing on
the work of Endel Tulving, e.g., his essay, ‘Episodic and semantic memory’, in The organization of
memory, ed. Endel Tulving and Wayne Donaldson (New York: Academic Press, 1972), pp. 381-403.
16 David Noy, Foreigners andRome: citizens andstrangers (London: Duckworth, 2000) . There is however some evidence for Indians in Alexandria: Dio Chrys. Or. 32.40.
17 Norbert Kramer, ‘Das Itinerar iTaOpol TlapdiKoi des Isidor von Charax - Beschreibung eines Handelsweges?’, Klio 85 (2003), 120-30 makes a strong case for a military rather than commercial
route, yet the fragmentary nature of the text makes such clear-cut options implausible.
The making ofRoman India 317 can be no doubt, at the level of a different kind of history, that the political revolution of the late first century bc made possible the much greater awareness of India in the first century ad. The pax Romana not only made
possible the long-distance exchange ofgoods to a greater degree than earlier;
it also heightened the demand for luxury goods in the Roman world, both
in the city of Rome and in other urban centres. The ivory statuette found
in Pompeii, though seemingly unmatched in the ancient Mediterranean, may be taken as representative of this. In this broad sense, Said’s model of Orientalism provides the inescapable framework of Roman Indography. It is appropriate to assert that the imperial context of geographical information deserves emphasis over others. This conclusion is in keeping with Foucault’s definition of a discourse, a system of knowledge largely defined by the power relations in which it is entwined. To see empire as a transcendent context is, admittedly, to adopt
an early twenty-first century view, by now several years into the Iraq War. There are however two points to be made in conclusion, both of them
challenging or at least qualifying the orientalist model in its usual form.
First, the imperial context here is no simple matter of us-and-them. In
a prominent position early in his work, Strabo speaks of the geographic knowledge made possible by the military successes of both the Roman and
Parthian empires