Introduction

On a journey from the eastern Mediterranean to India, the Greek sage
Apollonius ofTyana encountered a Roman official at the town of Zeugma

on the Euphrates:

When they entered Mesopotamia, the tax-collector in charge of Zeugma led
them to the notice-board and asked them what they were exporting. Apollonius
answered, ‘I am taking moderation, righteousness, virtue, self-control, courage and
discipline,’ thereby mentioning several feminine nouns. The tax-collector, already

contemplating his own gain, said, ‘Then you must declare these female slaves.’
Apollonius answered, ‘That is not possible, for these are not female slaves I’m
taking out, but so many royal ladies.’ (1.20)

1

The setting is significant: Zeugma (‘bridge’), corresponding to modern
Balkis in Syria, lies at a strategic position straddling the east Roman colonies

of Seleucia and Apamea, and thereby controlled a major east-west trade
route

2
.

More significant for our purposes, however, is the characterisation

of the pious sage. Add to this the comical misunderstanding whereby his
philosophical quest appears as a commercial venture, and thus subject to
tax - at least in the eyes of a rapacious official. Philostratus’ Life ofApollonius

of Tyana, the hagiography of this polytheist holy man, was written in the
third century ad, but it purports to tell of a journey undertaken in the first
century ad. It is, in an important sense, the world of Philostratus, around
1

TTapiovTas 8 e auToOs es T-qv pEcrqv tcov TtOTapcbv 6 teAgovtis 6 EmpEpArmEvos tco ZEuypaTi
Ttpos to tttvockiov f)y£ kcci qpcoTa, 6 ti drrrayoiEV, 6 8e AttoAAcovios arrayco, £<{>rj, CTGO<t>poowr)v

SiKaioauvqv apETqv EyKpaTEiav av8p£iav &ctkt)cjiv, ttoAAcx Kai outgo 0T)Aecc Eipas ovopaTa. 6 8’
PAettgov to eccutoO KEp8os aToypavpai ouv e^t) tcxs 8ouAas. 6 8e ouk e^eotiv, eTttev, ou yap

f|8r]

2

8ouAas airayco TauTas, aAAa SEorroivas.
Anthony Comfort, Catherine Abadie-Reynal and Rifat Erge^, ‘Crossing the Euphrates in antiquity:
Zeugma seen from space’, Anatolian Studies 50 (2000), 99-126; Anthony Comfort and Rifat Ergef,
‘Following the Euphrates in antiquity: north-south routes around Zeugma’, Anatolian Studies 51
(2001), 19—49. Recent dam-building has necessitated rescue excavation and attracted much attention:
see esp. David Kennedy et al..

The twin towns ofZeugma on the Euphrates: rescue work and historical

studies (Portsmouth, RI: JRA supplement 27, 1998), with C. S. Lightfoot, ‘Trying to rescue Zeugma’,

JRA 14 (2001), 643-8.
I

The making ofRoman India

2

ad 222-35, that most clearly emerges from the text. Yet it would be wrong
to overlook the dramatic setting: Apollonius was, according to this account

and others, an eminent figure of the first century ad. Journeys such as his
inform The making of Roman India not so much for their own historicity
,

as for the images of India with which they are connected.

India emerges in Philostratus’ work as a place of special knowledge, its
religious specialists themselves the objects of pilgrimage. There are many

indications that Apollonius, in this guise, is re-enacting Alexander’s expedition that reached as far as the Indus valley before his troops forced him
to return (327-325 bc). For it was with Alexander’s invasion that this image
of India entered Greek thinking; his interview with Indian sages inspired
several accounts from the earliest Alexander histories into the Middle Ages.

But the implicit contrast between the military expedition and the holy
man’s quest could not be more pointed, as the anecdote of Apollonius
shows. It is mainly in connection with Alexander that we encounter the
mythical figures of Dionysus and Heracles - themselves pan-Mediterranean
travellers par excellence but in several accounts linked with India. In

one

way or another, the memory of Alexander will be a key motif throughout
this book. 3

Apollonius is not the only person who is supposed to have travelled from
the Mediterranean to India in the first century ad. The apostle Thomas
travelled from Jerusalem to India as a missionary, sent by Jesus.

Here he
preached a message of bodily purity and enacted various miracles until dying
a martyr s death at the behest of an Indian ruler. This story, recounted in

the apocryphal Acts of Thomas a Syriac text composed in the early third
century ad, was translated into Greek, Latin and many other languages,
and widely diffused in late antiquity.
Both Apollonius and Thomas travel along routes that correspond
,

demonstrably with networks of commodity exchange. One particularly
valuable witness to the long-distance exchange is the anonymously written
Periplus ofthe Erythraean Sea. This text, which dates to the years ad 40-70,
is a sea-captain’s manual, without literary embellishment, listing
specific
commodities, ports and other practical matters related to sea-borne trade

between Egypt, via the Red Sea, following the seasonal monsoon winds
3

W. J. Aerts, ‘Alexander the Great and ancient travel stories’, in Travelfact and travel fiction, ed. Zweder
von Martels (Leiden: Brill, 1994), pp. 30—8, esp. 35 n. 24 on those mythical travellers; cf. Francois
Hartog, Memories of Odysseus: frontier tales from ancient Greece (University of Chicago Press, 2001). It
is as well to bear in mind, from a classicists point of view, the comment of
Diana Spencer, The Roman
Alexander: reading a cultural myth (University of Exeter Press, 2002), p. xv: ‘The Alexander we know

and reinterpret is himself a Roman construct, a product of Roman sensibilities and worldview; it
was the Romans who made him “the Great”.’

Introduction

3

south of the Arabian peninsula to India. Yet even this text, functional
rather than literary, refers to ‘evidence of Alexanders expedition’ (ch. 41).

These three travellers — Apollonius the sage, Thomas the apostle and
the anonymous Periplus author - seem, at first glance, readily open to
investigation for the concrete details of their journeys. Notably different

motives took them to India, and indeed it is tempting to define travellers

by their motives. 4 Yet, in the first two cases, when we consider the

time-lapse between event and account,
investigation cannot proceed without

it

soon becomes clear that such

due consideration of the textual

The emphasis here will be more on travel texts
than travellers themselves. Armchair travellers are no less important in this
complexities involved.

study, for it is particularly on their account that imagination comes to the
forefront.
It is

in the imaginative realm that the goal of this book is most readily

articulated: to analyse the literary presentation

of India in texts of the

Roman empire. What visions of India do they harbour? Consideration of
5

these texts will be, in part, in relation to different kinds of physical travel,

of lived practice, that linked India and the Mediterranean. For current
purposes, the historicity of actual journeys is of some consequence, but

than the responses they inspire. In this respect we will need to
inquire where, on a modern map, these visions would be located, even as
we consider mental maps.
less so

*

What, then, did India mean to Romans of the empire? The book-ends
framing this study are Augustus on the one hand and Cosmas Indicopleustes

and Isidore of Seville on the other, roughly the late first century bc and
early seventh ad. Its aims are to sketch the features of this ‘Roman India’

and to account for them by analysing the processes that brought them into
being. It focuses primarily, but not exclusively, on Greek and Latin literary
texts.

The term ‘Roman India’ is unexpected, even paradoxical. No Roman
commander ever conquered India, though many were conscious of someone

who had done so, in their view: Alexander III of Macedon. At least one
emperor, Trajan (reigned ad 98-117), entertained fantasies of emulating
4

Tzvetan Todorov, On human diversity: nationalism, racism and exoticism in French thought (Cambridge,

5

Some of the Latin texts under discussion have been translated and annotated by Jacques Andre and
Jean Filliozat, Linde vue de Rome (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1986). Greek texts have fared less well, but

MA: Harvard University Press, 1993), pp. 341-52; compare the framework sketched Roxanne L. Euben,
‘The comparative politics of travel’, Parallax 9.4 (2003), 18-28.

note Ramesh Chandra Majumdar, The classical accounts ofIndia (Calcutta: Mukhopadhyay, i960).

The making ofRoman India

4

him 6 Most importantly, India gained a place in Roman minds as the
.

ultimate exotic, a sense consciously expressed in artifacts and historical texts

but also, even more tellingly perhaps, in passing references in a wide variety
of texts. It is this range of exotic imaginings that the book adumbrates.

The work falls into three parts. The first, ‘Creation of a discourse’,
lends time-depth by presenting the earliest relevant texts and identifying
the processes that gave rise to

Roman Indography. It analyses material

up to the late Republic, with special attention to the figure of Alexander.
Certainly his expedition generated an enormous amount of geographic,
ethnographic and other natural historical writing in the Hellenistic world.
Foremost among these are the account of the naval commander, Nearchus,
which underlies Arrian’s Indica (second century ad). Megasthenes’ Indica
comes from less than a generation after Alexander’s campaign, and follows
directly in its wake 7 Now accounts by Megasthenes, Nearchus and others
linked with Alexander’s campaign survive merely in fragments embedded
.

in later works; here it is necessary to recreate the original works to the extent

possible, and with a critical awareness of their fragmentary character

8
.

The centrality of Alexander notwithstanding, it is important to scratch
below the surface in identifying the origins of this process. Special prominence in this chapter goes to the Achaemenid empire as the source of Greek

Indography 9 The most substantial pre-Alexander writers on India, namely
.

Herodotus and Ctesias (mid- and late-fifth century bc respectively), discuss India in the context of Achaemenid Persia, of which it was a satrapy or

province. This opening chapter explores, in part, the impact of Achaemenid

India on the making of Hellenistic (and beyond that Roman) Indography.

Indeed, it can be argued, Alexander’s military achievement can be seen as a

performance of Persian kingship, in its fullest geographic extent. It would
be wrong, by this reckoning, to take at face value the prominence later
writers attribute to Alexander in this regard

10
.

6

Dio Cassius, Roman history 68.29.1: cf. Chapter 5, section 1 5 below.

7

Albrecht Dihle, in an important article, has shown that the figure of Alexander lent a degree of

.

authority to these early Hellenistic accounts of India - with the result that a canon of Indography
was formed at an early stage, to the exclusion of information that later came to hand: ‘The conception
of India in Hellenistic and Roman literature’, PCPhS io (1964), 15-23, reprinted in Antike und Orient.

Gesammelte Aufsdtze (Heidelberg: Winter, 1984), pp. 89-97. Indeed, Dihle’s wide-ranging work is
central to most aspects of the current project; however, with the partial exception ofan encyclopaedia
article (‘Indien’, RAC), he has not ventured an overview of the topics discussed here.
8

Especially useful in this respect is Glenn W. Most (ed.), Collecting fragments - Fragmente sammeln

(Gottingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1997).
9

This has previously been suggested, e.g., R. D. Milns, ‘Greek writers on India before Alexander,’
Australian Journal ofPolitics and History 35 (1989), 353-63, but its implications hardly explored.

10

Spencer, Roman Alexander, emphasises the variety of responses, though restricting her purview to
Latin texts up to Trajan. Words of caution against overestimating the role of Alexander among

Introduction

5

Against this background, Part II, ‘Features of a discourse’, moves the
focus to the imperial period as it puts India in a context of Roman ethnography and geography. What are the features of India as it appears in writers

such as Strabo, Pliny the elder and Arrian? How do these features compare
with the profile of other lands, e.g., Egypt, Arabia and China? This inquiry
rests mostly on literary sources

(Chapter 2). 11 Several of these writers may

be linked with the Second Sophistic, to use the modern term for a cultural

movement of Greek speakers under Roman rule (around ad 60-230). 11 The
literature of this period is characterised by the importance of rhetoric — particularly as practised by professional orators or ‘sophists’ - and by nostalgia

for the classical Greek past that preceded Roman domination. Less familiar

than the literary texts but no less significant is a group of images representing India, including the Great Hunt mosaic at Piazza Armerina (early

fourth century ad), which deserve investigation of their own (Chapter 3). 13
Part III, ‘Contexts of a discourse’, constitutes the most direct answer
to the central question of this book. Following the description of Roman

Indography above, this substantial section offers three specific lines of analysis. First

(Chapter 4), India was the source of commodities, including

spices, fabrics and precious stones. Anxieties about luxuria inform many of

the literary texts. While it is not possible to present all archaeological and

documentary evidence for Roman trade with South Asia, it is necessary and
feasible to outline the kinds of objects exchanged, routes and personnel,
and in particular, to indicate ways in which these informed Roman ideas

about India.

Second (Chapter 5), India constituted the end of empire, and, by implication, the

end of the earth.

When Augustus spoke in the Res gestae

Roman commanders and rulers come from Peter Green, ‘Caesar and Alexander: aemulatio, imitatio,

AH 3 (1978), 1—26; and E. S. Gruen, ‘Rome and the myth of Alexander’, in Ancient

comparatio’, A]

history in a modern university , ed. T. W. Hillard et al.

(North Ryde, NSW: Macquarie University,

1998), pp. 178-91.
11

Indographic texts are analysed within traditions of Hellenistic ethnography by James S. Romm, The
edges of the earth in ancient thought (Princeton University Press, 1992), chapter 3. There is now a

fundamental new discussion of Strabo by Katherine Clarke, Between geography and history (Oxford:
Clarendon, 1999), pp. 193-336; notable also is Trevor Murphy, Pliny the Elders Natural history: the
empire in the encyclopedia (Oxford University Press, 2004).
12

Amid an extensive and fast-growing bibliography, note especially the surveys of Graham Anderson,
The Second Sophistic: a cultural phenomenon in the Roman Empire (London: Routledge, 1993), and

13

The only synthesis available of these artifacts is by Hans Graeven, ‘Darstellung der Inder in antiken
Kunstweken’,/Dy4/(B,) 15 (1900), 195-218; see now also C. R. Whittaker, ‘Sex on the frontiers’, in
a volume that bears on many of the interests addressed here: Rome and its frontiers: the dynamics of

Simon Swain, Hellenism and empire: language, classicism and power in the Greek world, AD 50—250
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1996).

empire (London: Routledge, 2004).

The making ofRoman India

6

(ad 14) of Indian ambassadors coming from India, ‘which no Roman ruler

had ever seen before’, he was implying Roman rule over the farthest expanse
of land — something that emerges from the context of that inscription. The
hyperbolic language of Augustan poetry, suggesting Roman military dominance as far as India, deserves comparison here. Over time, this elision of
orbis terrarum and empire takes on a different character, when for example
the Christian geographies of Orosius and Isidore present India as marking
the end of God’s kingdom. (Such Christian conceptions of India from late
antiquity show a high degree of continuity with maps of the later Middle

Ages, e.g., the thirteenth-century Ebstorf world map, where ethnographic
traditions are visually represented.) The focus on changing geographies of

India thus provides an opportunity to trace changing conceptions of empire

between Augustus and the early Middle Ages. 14

Third (Chapter 6), India was a source of special knowledge. This was
embodied especially in the ‘naked philosophers’ ( Gymnosophistae), who
featured in accounts of Alexander’s expedition (e.g., Arrian’s Anabasis and
Plutarch’s Life ofAlexander, both of the second century ad). Alexander’s

interview with the ‘naked philosophers’ forms the basis of this vision of
India. It was by no means limited to historiography, since it became a central

theme in the Alexander legend in its many other forms. In particular, this
chapter suggests why India continued to appeal, over several centuries, as a
source of wisdom ( sophia ). Apollonius ofTyana, the philosophic holy man

of the first century ad whose life is described in Philostratus’ hagiography
of him (late second or early third century ad), is one significant traveller
to India, invoking as he does the memory of Pythagoras and archaic Greek
traditions about eastern wisdom. Philostratus’ Life of Apollonius is very

much a text of the Second Sophistic. Another, rather different traveller is
the apostle Thomas, also linked with the first century ad: the apocryphal
Acts of Thomas present an India that is the ultimate target of Christian

mission. The purpose of visiting India could thus be either to learn or to
teach, and here Apollonius is a figure of special complexity. 15

By way of conclusion, there follows an attempt to bring together these
various strands. This fourth part is entitled ‘Intersections of a discourse’. If
different Roman Indias have emerged from the foregoing discussion, it is

14

Anna-Dorothee von den Brincken, Kartographische Quellen (Turnhout: Brepols, 1988); N. Lozovsky,
‘The earth is our book: geographical knowledge in the Latin West ca. 400—1000 (Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 2000).
John Eisner, ‘Hagiographic geography: travel and allegory in the Life ofApollonius of Tyana \ JHS
11 7 (1997), 22-37; more generally, Arnaldo Momigliano, Alien wisdom: the limits of Hellenization
(Cambridge University Press, 1975).
’

15

Introduction

7

necessary to look into the ways in which they were realised in lived practice,

and how they related to each other. It will be clear by now that there were
different registers of geographic and topographic knowledge, some more
scholarly and scientific (e.g., Claudius Ptolemy’s Geography, second century
ad), others more popular and generalized (e.g. the Alexander Romance, third
century ad), yet others practical ( Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, mid-first
century ad). But to what extent do they constitute a single, integrated

Roman conception of India? To what extent are Roman ideas about India
extrapolations of their ideas about western Asia? What conclusions emerge
about the nature and place of the exotic in Roman imperial culture? In particular, this epilogue is an opportunity to evaluate the memory of Alexander
as a unifying figure for Roman discourses about India: in various ways, it
plays a part in ideas about India as a place of commodities, empire or

wisdom.
*

The present work is a history of representations that is concerned with
social context. As such, it is emphatically not a study of ‘contacts’ between

India and the Mediterranean. (Whether it would be possible to write such a
book is doubtful, though some studies do at least point in that direction .) 16
By the same token, this is not a book about the ‘influence’ of India on
the Mediterranean world or vice versa 17 Rather, the approach adopted
.

here is to identify Roman responses to India, analysed with reference to
the concept of discourse. Responses, in this sense, place the focus squarely
in the Mediterranean, without claiming to speak in equal measure for all

the cultural traditions spanned.

The concept of a discourse thus refers
Roman

to representations, conceived in terms of power relations within

society

.

lS

18

In this way India provides a vantage point from which to examine

For one attempt, see Jean W. Sedlar, India and the Greek world (Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield,
1980), which focuses on philosophy.

A multi-volume project by Klaus Kartunnen traces common

features between South Asian and Greco-Roman literary traditions: thus far India in early Greek
literature (Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society, 1989)

and India and the Hellenistic world (Helsinki:

Finnish Oriental Society, 1997) have appeared. Especially valuable is Himanshu Prabha Ray’s The
archaeology ofseafaring in ancient South Asia (Cambridge University Press, 2003).
17

Comparison between Buddhism and Christianity has usually been considered in terms of influence
one way or the other: Zacharias P. Thundy, Buddha and Christ: nativity stories and Indian traditions
(Leiden: Brill, 1993), pp. 1-17, reviews earlier scholarship. Such ‘influence-research’ is defended by
J. Duncan M. Derrett, ‘An Indian metaphor in St. John’s Gospel’, JRAS, series III. 9 (1999), 271-86,
esp. 271—3. In the sphere of material culture, see now the massive work of Warwick Ball, Rome in
the east: the transformation ofan empire (London: Routledge, 2000).
18
Michel Foucault, Discipline and punish: the birth of the prison tr. Alan Sheridan, 2nd edn (New
York: Vintage, 1995). For a more recent survey, Paul A. Bov6, ‘Discourse’, in Critical terms for literary
study ed. Frank Lentricchia and Thomas McLaughlin, 2nd edn (Chicago: University of Chicago
,

,

Press, 1995), pp. 50-65.

The making ofRoman India

8

Roman worldviews. To focus on Roman responses rather than contacts or
influence is perhaps to err on the side of caution. But the limitations bring
with them a major advantage, namely, that it is thereby possible to avoid

an essentialised view of timeless India. It is the contexts of Indography that

we seek especially to understand. In examining Roman thinking, it is as
much the why as the how that will concern us.
In so far as this study is concerned with empire as a context of knowl-

edge, it shares an aim with a highly influential and controversial study of
representations of eastern lands and peoples: Edward Said’s Orientalism ,' 9
Said’s insistence on the constructed quality of the ‘Orient’, on the political

implications of scholarship, has become an orthodoxy of sorts, despite the
prodigious critique it has received. 20 In principle, I share that sense. Hence
the emphasis on the political and generic contexts of Indography discussed
in Chapters i and 2 below. However, I do not imagine that Said’s model
of orientalism applies without further ado to this very different period of

history - one that is separated from modern colonialism by the Industrial

Revolution, and is thereby part of very different technological systems, and
a different economy of knowledge. It would be unfortunate if lip-service to

Said denied our temporal framework the measure of specificity due to any

period of historical inquiry. Roman thinking about India may have had
a very powerful context of empire, as Chapters 1 and

4 variously explore;

but that does not mean that the conditions of Roman contact with India

resembled those of British imperialism. It is certainly possible and even
necessary to draw comparisons between modern and premodern versions
of orientalism, but it would be much better for those to proceed from
the material itself, appropriately delimited and contextualised, rather than
a priori. To this question of comparison we shall return in individual chapters and in the conclusion.

The paradigm of Said’s Orientalism continues

to be an important one, providing a critical problem rather than an easy

formula.
19

Edward W. Said, Orientalism (New York: Pantheon, 1978): in a 1995 reprint, Said responds to his
critics.

For a recent dossier, Alexander Lyon Macfie (ed.), Orientalism: a reader (New York University Press,

2000) Among discussions of its relevance to the ancient Mediterranean, Phiroze Vasunia, ‘Hellenism
.

and empire: reading Edward Said’, Parallax 9 (2003), 88-97, offers a spirited defence, while several

Roman historians and archaeologists are favourably inclined: Dialogues in Roman imperialism: power,
discourse and discrepant experience in the Roman empire, ed. D.

1997).

J. Mattingly (Portsmouth, RI: JRA,
Note also M. J. Versluys, Aegyptiaca Romana: Nilotic scenes and the Roman views of Egypt

(Leiden: Brill, 2002).