mm

THE MAKING OF ROMAN INDIA

Latin and especially Greek texts of the imperial period contain a wealth
of references to ‘India’. The Making ofRoman India offers a survey of

such texts, read against a wide range of other sources, both archaeological and documentary. It emphasises the social processes whereby

the notion of India gained its exotic features, including the role of the
Persian empire and of Alexander’s expedition. Three kinds of social

context receive special attention: the trade in luxury commodities;
the political discourse of empire and its limits; and India’s status as a
place of special knowledge, embodied in ‘naked philosophers’. Roman
ideas about India ranged from the specific and concrete to the wildly
fantastic: it is necessary to account for such variety. The afterlife of
such ideas into late antiquity and beyond also receives consideration.

Grant Parker is Assistant Professor of Classics at Stanford
University.

GREEK CULTURE IN THE ROMAN WORLD
Editors

susan e. alcock, Brown University
jas elsner, Corpus Christi College, Oxford
simon goldhill, University of Cambridge

The Greek culture of the Roman Empire offers a rich field of study. Extraordinary insights can be gained into processes of multicultural contact and exchange,
political and ideological conflict, and the creativity of a changing, polyglot empire.

During this period, many fundamental elements of Western society were being
set in place: from the rise of Christianity, to an influential system of education,
to long-lived artistic canons. This series is the first to focus on the response of
Greek culture to its Roman imperial setting as a significant phenomenon in its
own right. To this end, it will publish original and innovative research in the art,
archaeology, epigraphy, history, philosophy, religion, and literature of the empire,
with an emphasis on Greek material.
Titles in series:

Athletics and Literature in the Roman Empire

Jason Konig
Describing Greece: Landscape and Literature in the Periegesis ofPausanias

William Hutton
Reading the Self in the Ancient Greek Novel

Tim Whitmarsh
Hellenism in Byzantium

Anthony Kaldellis
The Making ofRoman India
Grant Parker

THE MAKING OF

ROMAN INDIA
BY

GRANT PARKER

Cambridge
UNIVERSITY PRESS

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, Sao Paulo, Delhi

Cambridge University Press

The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB 2 8ru, UK
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York

www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521858341

© Grant Parker 2008
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception

and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2008

Printed in the United Kingdom at the University Press, Cambridge

A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
isbn 978-0-521-85834-2 hardback

Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or
accuracy of urls for external or third-party internet websites referred to
in this publication, and does not guarantee that any content on such
websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Dedicated to my family,
especially Brendah Gaine, Milly and Dave Parker, Joan Subhani

and, of course, Mavis and Dick Parker

Contents

List offigures

page x

List of maps

xi

Preface

xii

Introduction

PART I
1.

i

CREATION OF A DISCOURSE

Achaemenid India and Alexander
I.

II.

The extent of Achaemenid power

PART 2
2.

14

1.2.

Hecataeus’ cosmos

18

1.3.

Herodotus and the satrapies

21

1.4.

Marvels and lies of Ctesias

28

Alexander and aftermath

33

11. 1.

A conqueror and his historians

33

11. 2.

Megasthenes and Chandragupta’s court

42

11. 3.

Bactrians and ‘Indo-Greeks’

48

Mapping India: from the bematists to Eratosthenes
Origins and process in the making of Roman India

II.

51

54

FEATURES OF A DISCOURSE

India described
I.

13

Scylax and the King of Kings

11. 4.

III.

u

1 . 1.

69

Contexts of indography

71

1.1.

Historiography

71

1.2.

Geography

72

1.3.

Natural history

78

1.4.

Romance and mime

80

‘Hanging tags’: topics of thought

82

11. 1.

Indian pasts

83

11.2.

Profusion

86

vii

Contents

viii

11.3.

Social divisions

87

11.4.

Gender relations

90

11.5.

Space and race

93

II. 6.

Catalogue or system?

94

Literary features: modes of description

98

III.2.

Omission and abbreviation

too

III.3.

Authors and authority

103

Utopianism and barbarism

105

HI*

Narrative space

no

III.6.

Analogy

III.7.

Fragments

113

III. 8.

Closure

116

III.4.

IV.

3.

II.

III.

PART 3

II.

III.

IV.

V.

VI.

X2I

Varieties of image

122

1.1.

Marvel

122

1.2.

Triumph of Bacchus

125

1.3.

Personification

1.4.

Christian topography

131

135

A typology of Indias

140

Conclusion

142

CONTEXTS OF A DISCOURSE

Commodities
1 .

in

Conclusion

India depicted
I.

97

The Periplus form

III.i.

Objects of exchange and the materiality of distance

147
149

I.i.

Spices and aromatics

1.2.

Precious stones

154

I.3.

Fabrics

156

I.4.

Slaves

I.5.

Animals

159

1.6.

Craft goods

163

The rhetoric of excess

165

Trade networks and the longue duree

150

157

171

III.i.

Varieties of evidence

171

III. 2.

Chronologies, personnel and routes

178

Counting commodities, or how to lie with statistics

183

Mapping commodities

189

V.i.

Experience and mediation

191

V.2.

Specificity and identification

196

Conclusion: fragments and big men

198

Contents
5.

Empire
I.

6.

ix

203

Pax Romana and people of the dawn

207

1.1.

Orbis terrarum imperio populi Romani subiecta

1.2.

City and empire

214

1.3.

The production of imperial space: Strabo and Pliny

217

1.4.

Policy and propaganda

219

1.5.

Trajan’s Parthian campaign

1.6.

Itinerarium Alexandri

209

221

223

II.

Christian topography, Christian empire

227

III.

11.1.
The western tradition of Orosius and Isidore
11. 2.
The eastern tradition of Cosmas Indicopleustes
The rhetorical background: imperial panegyric

240

IV.

Orbis terrarum urbi spectandus the mechanics of representation

244

V.

Conclusion

247

:

Wisdom
I.

II.

236

251

Writing wisdom

251

Wisdoms alien and other

254

11.1.

Metamorphoses of sophia

254

11.2.

Elements of wisdom

260

Jews, Chaldaeans and Indians
Brahmans and Gymnosophists

11.3.
III.

229

264
272

111. 1.

Social hierarchy

111. 2.

Alexanders interview: Palladius and others

278

111. 3.

Christians and Cynics

286

272

IV.

The diffusion of paideia-. Apollonius of Tyana

288

V.

Modalities of travel

294

VI.

V.i.

Pilgrimage into mission

295

V.2.

Thomas and tradition

297

V.3.

Belatedness and extrapolation

Conclusion

Conclusion: intersections of a discourse
I.

Mutations of Indography

301

305

308
308

II.

Readers, speakers and popular xenology

311

III.

Imperial memories of Alexander

315

Bibliography

319

Index

355

Figures

1.

Indian contingent in tribute procession at the Apadana

complex in Persepolis, sixth century bc. Courtesy of the
Oriental Institute, University of Chicago.
2.

page 14

Monstrous people in Hartmann von Schedel’s Nuremberg
chronicle (1493). Courtesy of Duke University Rare Book,

3.

Manuscript and Special Collections Library.
Triumph of Bacchus, second or third century ad: Roman

124

sarcophagus, Walters Gallery, Baltimore. Courtesy of the

Walters Gallery.
4.

I2 6

Marble head with cirrus knot, Trajanic. Villa Borghese,

Rome.
5.

12 c)

Barberini ivory, sixth century ad. Louvre, Paris. Courtesy

Reunion des Musses Nationaux / Art Resource, New York.
6.

130

Personification of India, apse of Great Hunt mosaic, Villa
Filosofiana, Piazza Armerina, Sicily, fourth century ad.

Courtesy Scala / Art Resource, New York.

132

7. Personification of India, silver platter, sixth century ad.

Archaeology Museum, Istanbul. Courtesy of the Deutsches
Archaologisches Institut, Berlin.
8.

!33

Yakshi. Red sandstone from a Jain temple. Kushan dynasty,

second century ad. Victoria and Albert Museum, London.

Courtesy of Victoria and Albert Museum, London / Art
Resource, New York.
9.

j3<5

Cosmas Indicopleustes, manuscript miniatures, eleventh
century. Sketches by Alexander Hollmann.

10

.

11.

138

Ivory statuette found at Pompeii, first century bc, Museo

Nazionale, Naples.

jg 2

Peutinger map, thirteenth century, easternmost segment,
Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna. Courtesy of Ancient

World Mapping Center, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill.

226
x

nw

Maps

1.

Eastern Mediterranean and western Indian Ocean

2.

Alexander s route

3.

Trade route with monsoons

page xiv—xv
<S

OO

xi

Preface

What did India mean to Romans of the empire? Between these covers I
outline some possible answers, sifting through a variety of literary and to

some degree material and documentary evidence, and paying heed to the
different contexts of Roman information about India. The book is aimed

not merely at classicists but also at those interested in ancient India or the
history of orientalism. As a result, I have not assumed specialist knowledge.
If a reader finds a particular discussion or explanation unnecessary, I hope

he or she will bear in mind that others will, I trust, come to the book from
different backgrounds.

Long ago it became clear to me that a study on this theme cannot be
exhaustive, and that no two persons tackling it will produce the same kind

of result. This realisation has brought consolation amid the appearance,
in recent years, of many works of relevance. As in any work of synthesis,
any one topic covered or piece of evidence deployed inevitably leaves room

for greater depth of discussion. I have had to make extensive use of the
researches of others, particularly archaeologists and other South Asianists.
While my own background is in the study of ancient Greek and Roman
societies, and particularly Latin literature, I can merely hope that this work

contributes to broader debates.

During the late stages of revision, Dominique Lenfant’s Bude edition,
Ctesias de Cnide, and Pierre Schneider’s L ’Ethiopie et I’Inde came into

my

hands. I have tried to take account of them where possible, but have not

been able to engage with them as fully as they deserve. Years ago, two books
played a more formative role than their current place in the notes suggests:

Arnaldo Momigliano’s Alien Wisdom: The Limits ofHellenization and James
S. Romm’s The Edges of the Earth in Ancient Thought. Elsewhere I have
delved into material that is touched on here: ‘Hellenism in an Afghan con-

Memory as History: The Legacy ofAlexander in Asia ed. Himanshu
Prabha Ray and Daniel T. Potts (Delhi: Aryan International, 2007).
text’ in

,

xii

Preface

xiii

An earlier version of chapter 3 has appeared in Ancient India in its Wider
World, ed. Grant Parker and Carla Sinopoli (Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Centers for South and Southeast Asian Studies, 2008); and of

chapter 4 in the Journal ofthe Economic and Social History ofthe Orient 45.1
(2002) 40—95. In each case I thank the publishers for permission to reprint.

This book took its current shape at the University of Michigan (thanks to
a generous fellowship of the Michigan Society of Fellows) and at Duke University. The reworking process has been

much helped by a UN C/Duke grad-

uate seminar jointly taught with Richard Talbert, and earlier by a Michigan
symposium co-organised with Carla Sinopoli and Tom Trautmann, as well
as a graduate seminar jointly taught with

Sue Alcock. Several teachers at

Princeton University guided my initial efforts, and continued to take an
interest: Peter Brown, Elaine Fantham, Anthony Grafton and Brent Shaw;

my debt to Kathleen Coleman goes back to undergraduate days. At a crucial stage, Dieter Harlfinger was my academic host for half a year in the
stimulating environment of the Graduiertenkolleg Textuberlieferung und

Wissenschaftsgeschichte at the University of Hamburg.

A seminar organ-

ised by John Hilton at the University of KwaZulu-Natal (Durban) helped

me clarify my thoughts early on.

My research was supported by the wonderful libraries of Princeton,
Hamburg, Michigan, Duke and UNC-Chapel Hill, and for substantial
periods also by those of the universities of Cape Town and Sydney.
In this project I have received help of so many kinds from so many
I must avoid naming names: any
would be absurdly long yet unavoidably incomplete. I learned much

people over such a long period that
list

from the referees’ reports, and enjoyed working with the editorial team
at Cambridge University Press. In the final stages, Tom Elliott of UNC’s
Ancient World Mapping Center kindly produced the maps; Marie-Louise

Catsalis, Kay Ebel and Alka Patel helped secure images; Richard Parker and

Fred Porta helped with proofreading.

To all, my heartfelt thanks; of course, they cannot be blamed for the
deficiencies that remain. And how can

I

fail

to mention the support of

my family, when they have so long endured my efforts and made them
worthwhile?

Zeugma

Spasinou

Syene/Aswan

Zanzibar

Map i Eastern Mediterranean and western Indian Ocean

CASPATYRUS?

Chennai (Madras)

Kodungallur/Cranganore (Muziris?)

Taprobane /
Lanka

Sri

INDIAN
o

OC EAN
500

1,000 Miles

L
T
o

1,000

2,000 Kilometres

Introduction

On a journey from the eastern Mediterranean to India, the Greek sage
Apollonius ofTyana encountered a Roman official at the town of Zeugma

on the Euphrates:

When they entered Mesopotamia, the tax-collector in charge of Zeugma led
them to the notice-board and asked them what they were exporting. Apollonius
answered, ‘I am taking moderation, righteousness, virtue, self-control, courage and
discipline,’ thereby mentioning several feminine nouns. The tax-collector, already

contemplating his own gain, said, ‘Then you must declare these female slaves.’
Apollonius answered, ‘That is not possible, for these are not female slaves I’m
taking out, but so many royal ladies.’ (1.20)

1

The setting is significant: Zeugma (‘bridge’), corresponding to modern
Balkis in Syria, lies at a strategic position straddling the east Roman colonies

of Seleucia and Apamea, and thereby controlled a major east-west trade
route

2
.

More significant for our purposes, however, is the characterisation

of the pious sage. Add to this the comical misunderstanding whereby his
philosophical quest appears as a commercial venture, and thus subject to
tax - at least in the eyes of a rapacious official. Philostratus’ Life ofApollonius

of Tyana, the hagiography of this polytheist holy man, was written in the
third century ad, but it purports to tell of a journey undertaken in the first
century ad. It is, in an important sense, the world of Philostratus, around
1

TTapiovTas 8 e auToOs es T-qv pEcrqv tcov TtOTapcbv 6 teAgovtis 6 EmpEpArmEvos tco ZEuypaTi
Ttpos to tttvockiov f)y£ kcci qpcoTa, 6 ti drrrayoiEV, 6 8e AttoAAcovios arrayco, £<{>rj, CTGO<t>poowr)v

SiKaioauvqv apETqv EyKpaTEiav av8p£iav &ctkt)cjiv, ttoAAcx Kai outgo 0T)Aecc Eipas ovopaTa. 6 8’
PAettgov to eccutoO KEp8os aToypavpai ouv e^t) tcxs 8ouAas. 6 8e ouk e^eotiv, eTttev, ou yap

f|8r]

2

8ouAas airayco TauTas, aAAa SEorroivas.
Anthony Comfort, Catherine Abadie-Reynal and Rifat Erge^, ‘Crossing the Euphrates in antiquity:
Zeugma seen from space’, Anatolian Studies 50 (2000), 99-126; Anthony Comfort and Rifat Ergef,
‘Following the Euphrates in antiquity: north-south routes around Zeugma’, Anatolian Studies 51
(2001), 19—49. Recent dam-building has necessitated rescue excavation and attracted much attention:
see esp. David Kennedy et al..

The twin towns ofZeugma on the Euphrates: rescue work and historical

studies (Portsmouth, RI: JRA supplement 27, 1998), with C. S. Lightfoot, ‘Trying to rescue Zeugma’,

JRA 14 (2001), 643-8.
I

The making ofRoman India

2

ad 222-35, that most clearly emerges from the text. Yet it would be wrong
to overlook the dramatic setting: Apollonius was, according to this account

and others, an eminent figure of the first century ad. Journeys such as his
inform The making of Roman India not so much for their own historicity
,

as for the images of India with which they are connected.

India emerges in Philostratus’ work as a place of special knowledge, its
religious specialists themselves the objects of pilgrimage. There are many

indications that Apollonius, in this guise, is re-enacting Alexander’s expedition that reached as far as the Indus valley before his troops forced him
to return (327-325 bc). For it was with Alexander’s invasion that this image
of India entered Greek thinking; his interview with Indian sages inspired
several accounts from the earliest Alexander histories into the Middle Ages.

But the implicit contrast between the military expedition and the holy
man’s quest could not be more pointed, as the anecdote of Apollonius
shows. It is mainly in connection with Alexander that we encounter the
mythical figures of Dionysus and Heracles - themselves pan-Mediterranean
travellers par excellence but in several accounts linked with India. In

one

way or another, the memory of Alexander will be a key motif throughout
this book. 3

Apollonius is not the only person who is supposed to have travelled from
the Mediterranean to India in the first century ad. The apostle Thomas
travelled from Jerusalem to India as a missionary, sent by Jesus.

Here he
preached a message of bodily purity and enacted various miracles until dying
a martyr s death at the behest of an Indian ruler. This story, recounted in

the apocryphal Acts of Thomas a Syriac text composed in the early third
century ad, was translated into Greek, Latin and many other languages,
and widely diffused in late antiquity.
Both Apollonius and Thomas travel along routes that correspond
,

demonstrably with networks of commodity exchange. One particularly
valuable witness to the long-distance exchange is the anonymously written
Periplus ofthe Erythraean Sea. This text, which dates to the years ad 40-70,
is a sea-captain’s manual, without literary embellishment, listing
specific
commodities, ports and other practical matters related to sea-borne trade

between Egypt, via the Red Sea, following the seasonal monsoon winds
3

W. J. Aerts, ‘Alexander the Great and ancient travel stories’, in Travelfact and travel fiction, ed. Zweder
von Martels (Leiden: Brill, 1994), pp. 30—8, esp. 35 n. 24 on those mythical travellers; cf. Francois
Hartog, Memories of Odysseus: frontier tales from ancient Greece (University of Chicago Press, 2001). It
is as well to bear in mind, from a classicists point of view, the comment of
Diana Spencer, The Roman
Alexander: reading a cultural myth (University of Exeter Press, 2002), p. xv: ‘The Alexander we know

and reinterpret is himself a Roman construct, a product of Roman sensibilities and worldview; it
was the Romans who made him “the Great”.’

Introduction

3

south of the Arabian peninsula to India. Yet even this text, functional
rather than literary, refers to ‘evidence of Alexanders expedition’ (ch. 41).

These three travellers — Apollonius the sage, Thomas the apostle and
the anonymous Periplus author - seem, at first glance, readily open to
investigation for the concrete details of their journeys. Notably different

motives took them to India, and indeed it is tempting to define travellers

by their motives. 4 Yet, in the first two cases, when we consider the

time-lapse between event and account,
investigation cannot proceed without

it

soon becomes clear that such

due consideration of the textual

The emphasis here will be more on travel texts
than travellers themselves. Armchair travellers are no less important in this
complexities involved.

study, for it is particularly on their account that imagination comes to the
forefront.
It is

in the imaginative realm that the goal of this book is most readily

articulated: to analyse the literary presentation

of India in texts of the

Roman empire. What visions of India do they harbour? Consideration of
5

these texts will be, in part, in relation to different kinds of physical travel,

of lived practice, that linked India and the Mediterranean. For current
purposes, the historicity of actual journeys is of some consequence, but

than the responses they inspire. In this respect we will need to
inquire where, on a modern map, these visions would be located, even as
we consider mental maps.
less so

*

What, then, did India mean to Romans of the empire? The book-ends
framing this study are Augustus on the one hand and Cosmas Indicopleustes

and Isidore of Seville on the other, roughly the late first century bc and
early seventh ad. Its aims are to sketch the features of this ‘Roman India’

and to account for them by analysing the processes that brought them into
being. It focuses primarily, but not exclusively, on Greek and Latin literary
texts.

The term ‘Roman India’ is unexpected, even paradoxical. No Roman
commander ever conquered India, though many were conscious of someone

who had done so, in their view: Alexander III of Macedon. At least one
emperor, Trajan (reigned ad 98-117), entertained fantasies of emulating
4

Tzvetan Todorov, On human diversity: nationalism, racism and exoticism in French thought (Cambridge,

5

Some of the Latin texts under discussion have been translated and annotated by Jacques Andre and
Jean Filliozat, Linde vue de Rome (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1986). Greek texts have fared less well, but

MA: Harvard University Press, 1993), pp. 341-52; compare the framework sketched Roxanne L. Euben,
‘The comparative politics of travel’, Parallax 9.4 (2003), 18-28.

note Ramesh Chandra Majumdar, The classical accounts ofIndia (Calcutta: Mukhopadhyay, i960).

The making ofRoman India

4

him 6 Most importantly, India gained a place in Roman minds as the
.

ultimate exotic, a sense consciously expressed in artifacts and historical texts

but also, even more tellingly perhaps, in passing references in a wide variety
of texts. It is this range of exotic imaginings that the book adumbrates.

The work falls into three parts. The first, ‘Creation of a discourse’,
lends time-depth by presenting the earliest relevant texts and identifying
the processes that gave rise to

Roman Indography. It analyses material

up to the late Republic, with special attention to the figure of Alexander.
Certainly his expedition generated an enormous amount of geographic,
ethnographic and other natural historical writing in the Hellenistic world.
Foremost among these are the account of the naval commander, Nearchus,
which underlies Arrian’s Indica (second century ad). Megasthenes’ Indica
comes from less than a generation after Alexander’s campaign, and follows
directly in its wake 7 Now accounts by Megasthenes, Nearchus and others
linked with Alexander’s campaign survive merely in fragments embedded
.

in later works; here it is necessary to recreate the original works to the extent

possible, and with a critical awareness of their fragmentary character

8
.

The centrality of Alexander notwithstanding, it is important to scratch
below the surface in identifying the origins of this process. Special prominence in this chapter goes to the Achaemenid empire as the source of Greek

Indography 9 The most substantial pre-Alexander writers on India, namely
.

Herodotus and Ctesias (mid- and late-fifth century bc respectively), discuss India in the context of Achaemenid Persia, of which it was a satrapy or

province. This opening chapter explores, in part, the impact of Achaemenid

India on the making of Hellenistic (and beyond that Roman) Indography.

Indeed, it can be argued, Alexander’s military achievement can be seen as a

performance of Persian kingship, in its fullest geographic extent. It would
be wrong, by this reckoning, to take at face value the prominence later
writers attribute to Alexander in this regard

10
.

6

Dio Cassius, Roman history 68.29.1: cf. Chapter 5, section 1 5 below.

7

Albrecht Dihle, in an important article, has shown that the figure of Alexander lent a degree of

.

authority to these early Hellenistic accounts of India - with the result that a canon of Indography
was formed at an early stage, to the exclusion of information that later came to hand: ‘The conception
of India in Hellenistic and Roman literature’, PCPhS io (1964), 15-23, reprinted in Antike und Orient.

Gesammelte Aufsdtze (Heidelberg: Winter, 1984), pp. 89-97. Indeed, Dihle’s wide-ranging work is
central to most aspects of the current project; however, with the partial exception ofan encyclopaedia
article (‘Indien’, RAC), he has not ventured an overview of the topics discussed here.
8

Especially useful in this respect is Glenn W. Most (ed.), Collecting fragments - Fragmente sammeln

(Gottingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 1997).
9

This has previously been suggested, e.g., R. D. Milns, ‘Greek writers on India before Alexander,’
Australian Journal ofPolitics and History 35 (1989), 353-63, but its implications hardly explored.

10

Spencer, Roman Alexander, emphasises the variety of responses, though restricting her purview to
Latin texts up to Trajan. Words of caution against overestimating the role of Alexander among

Introduction

5

Against this background, Part II, ‘Features of a discourse’, moves the
focus to the imperial period as it puts India in a context of Roman ethnography and geography. What are the features of India as it appears in writers

such as Strabo, Pliny the elder and Arrian? How do these features compare
with the profile of other lands, e.g., Egypt, Arabia and China? This inquiry
rests mostly on literary sources

(Chapter 2). 11 Several of these writers may

be linked with the Second Sophistic, to use the modern term for a cultural

movement of Greek speakers under Roman rule (around ad 60-230). 11 The
literature of this period is characterised by the importance of rhetoric — particularly as practised by professional orators or ‘sophists’ - and by nostalgia

for the classical Greek past that preceded Roman domination. Less familiar

than the literary texts but no less significant is a group of images representing India, including the Great Hunt mosaic at Piazza Armerina (early

fourth century ad), which deserve investigation of their own (Chapter 3). 13
Part III, ‘Contexts of a discourse’, constitutes the most direct answer
to the central question of this book. Following the description of Roman

Indography above, this substantial section offers three specific lines of analysis. First

(Chapter 4), India was the source of commodities, including

spices, fabrics and precious stones. Anxieties about luxuria inform many of

the literary texts. While it is not possible to present all archaeological and

documentary evidence for Roman trade with South Asia, it is necessary and
feasible to outline the kinds of objects exchanged, routes and personnel,
and in particular, to indicate ways in which these informed Roman ideas

about India.

Second (Chapter 5), India constituted the end of empire, and, by implication, the

end of the earth.

When Augustus spoke in the Res gestae

Roman commanders and rulers come from Peter Green, ‘Caesar and Alexander: aemulatio, imitatio,

AH 3 (1978), 1—26; and E. S. Gruen, ‘Rome and the myth of Alexander’, in Ancient

comparatio’, A]

history in a modern university , ed. T. W. Hillard et al.

(North Ryde, NSW: Macquarie University,

1998), pp. 178-91.
11

Indographic texts are analysed within traditions of Hellenistic ethnography by James S. Romm, The
edges of the earth in ancient thought (Princeton University Press, 1992), chapter 3. There is now a

fundamental new discussion of Strabo by Katherine Clarke, Between geography and history (Oxford:
Clarendon, 1999), pp. 193-336; notable also is Trevor Murphy, Pliny the Elders Natural history: the
empire in the encyclopedia (Oxford University Press, 2004).
12

Amid an extensive and fast-growing bibliography, note especially the surveys of Graham Anderson,
The Second Sophistic: a cultural phenomenon in the Roman Empire (London: Routledge, 1993), and

13

The only synthesis available of these artifacts is by Hans Graeven, ‘Darstellung der Inder in antiken
Kunstweken’,/Dy4/(B,) 15 (1900), 195-218; see now also C. R. Whittaker, ‘Sex on the frontiers’, in
a volume that bears on many of the interests addressed here: Rome and its frontiers: the dynamics of

Simon Swain, Hellenism and empire: language, classicism and power in the Greek world, AD 50—250
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1996).

empire (London: Routledge, 2004).

The making ofRoman India

6

(ad 14) of Indian ambassadors coming from India, ‘which no Roman ruler

had ever seen before’, he was implying Roman rule over the farthest expanse
of land — something that emerges from the context of that inscription. The
hyperbolic language of Augustan poetry, suggesting Roman military dominance as far as India, deserves comparison here. Over time, this elision of
orbis terrarum and empire takes on a different character, when for example
the Christian geographies of Orosius and Isidore present India as marking
the end of God’s kingdom. (Such Christian conceptions of India from late
antiquity show a high degree of continuity with maps of the later Middle

Ages, e.g., the thirteenth-century Ebstorf world map, where ethnographic
traditions are visually represented.) The focus on changing geographies of

India thus provides an opportunity to trace changing conceptions of empire

between Augustus and the early Middle Ages. 14

Third (Chapter 6), India was a source of special knowledge. This was
embodied especially in the ‘naked philosophers’ ( Gymnosophistae), who
featured in accounts of Alexander’s expedition (e.g., Arrian’s Anabasis and
Plutarch’s Life ofAlexander, both of the second century ad). Alexander’s

interview with the ‘naked philosophers’ forms the basis of this vision of
India. It was by no means limited to historiography, since it became a central

theme in the Alexander legend in its many other forms. In particular, this
chapter suggests why India continued to appeal, over several centuries, as a
source of wisdom ( sophia ). Apollonius ofTyana, the philosophic holy man

of the first century ad whose life is described in Philostratus’ hagiography
of him (late second or early third century ad), is one significant traveller
to India, invoking as he does the memory of Pythagoras and archaic Greek
traditions about eastern wisdom. Philostratus’ Life of Apollonius is very

much a text of the Second Sophistic. Another, rather different traveller is
the apostle Thomas, also linked with the first century ad: the apocryphal
Acts of Thomas present an India that is the ultimate target of Christian

mission. The purpose of visiting India could thus be either to learn or to
teach, and here Apollonius is a figure of special complexity. 15

By way of conclusion, there follows an attempt to bring together these
various strands. This fourth part is entitled ‘Intersections of a discourse’. If
different Roman Indias have emerged from the foregoing discussion, it is

14

Anna-Dorothee von den Brincken, Kartographische Quellen (Turnhout: Brepols, 1988); N. Lozovsky,
‘The earth is our book: geographical knowledge in the Latin West ca. 400—1000 (Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 2000).
John Eisner, ‘Hagiographic geography: travel and allegory in the Life ofApollonius of Tyana \ JHS
11 7 (1997), 22-37; more generally, Arnaldo Momigliano, Alien wisdom: the limits of Hellenization
(Cambridge University Press, 1975).
’

15

Introduction

7

necessary to look into the ways in which they were realised in lived practice,

and how they related to each other. It will be clear by now that there were
different registers of geographic and topographic knowledge, some more
scholarly and scientific (e.g., Claudius Ptolemy’s Geography, second century
ad), others more popular and generalized (e.g. the Alexander Romance, third
century ad), yet others practical ( Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, mid-first
century ad). But to what extent do they constitute a single, integrated

Roman conception of India? To what extent are Roman ideas about India
extrapolations of their ideas about western Asia? What conclusions emerge
about the nature and place of the exotic in Roman imperial culture? In particular, this epilogue is an opportunity to evaluate the memory of Alexander
as a unifying figure for Roman discourses about India: in various ways, it
plays a part in ideas about India as a place of commodities, empire or

wisdom.
*

The present work is a history of representations that is concerned with
social context. As such, it is emphatically not a study of ‘contacts’ between

India and the Mediterranean. (Whether it would be possible to write such a
book is doubtful, though some studies do at least point in that direction .) 16
By the same token, this is not a book about the ‘influence’ of India on
the Mediterranean world or vice versa 17 Rather, the approach adopted
.

here is to identify Roman responses to India, analysed with reference to
the concept of discourse. Responses, in this sense, place the focus squarely
in the Mediterranean, without claiming to speak in equal measure for all

the cultural traditions spanned.

The concept of a discourse thus refers
Roman

to representations, conceived in terms of power relations within

society

.

lS

18

In this way India provides a vantage point from which to examine

For one attempt, see Jean W. Sedlar, India and the Greek world (Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield,
1980), which focuses on philosophy.

A multi-volume project by Klaus Kartunnen traces common

features between South Asian and Greco-Roman literary traditions: thus far India in early Greek
literature (Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society, 1989)

and India and the Hellenistic world (Helsinki:

Finnish Oriental Society, 1997) have appeared. Especially valuable is Himanshu Prabha Ray’s The
archaeology ofseafaring in ancient South Asia (Cambridge University Press, 2003).
17

Comparison between Buddhism and Christianity has usually been considered in terms of influence
one way or the other: Zacharias P. Thundy, Buddha and Christ: nativity stories and Indian traditions
(Leiden: Brill, 1993), pp. 1-17, reviews earlier scholarship. Such ‘influence-research’ is defended by
J. Duncan M. Derrett, ‘An Indian metaphor in St. John’s Gospel’, JRAS, series III. 9 (1999), 271-86,
esp. 271—3. In the sphere of material culture, see now the massive work of Warwick Ball, Rome in
the east: the transformation ofan empire (London: Routledge, 2000).
18
Michel Foucault, Discipline and punish: the birth of the prison tr. Alan Sheridan, 2nd edn (New
York: Vintage, 1995). For a more recent survey, Paul A. Bov6, ‘Discourse’, in Critical terms for literary
study ed. Frank Lentricchia and Thomas McLaughlin, 2nd edn (Chicago: University of Chicago
,

,

Press, 1995), pp. 50-65.

The making ofRoman India

8

Roman worldviews. To focus on Roman responses rather than contacts or
influence is perhaps to err on the side of caution. But the limitations bring
with them a major advantage, namely, that it is thereby possible to avoid

an essentialised view of timeless India. It is the contexts of Indography that

we seek especially to understand. In examining Roman thinking, it is as
much the why as the how that will concern us.
In so far as this study is concerned with empire as a context of knowl-

edge, it shares an aim with a highly influential and controversial study of
representations of eastern lands and peoples: Edward Said’s Orientalism ,' 9
Said’s insistence on the constructed quality of the ‘Orient’, on the political

implications of scholarship, has become an orthodoxy of sorts, despite the
prodigious critique it has received. 20 In principle, I share that sense. Hence
the emphasis on the political and generic contexts of Indography discussed
in Chapters i and 2 below. However, I do not imagine that Said’s model
of orientalism applies without further ado to this very different period of

history - one that is separated from modern colonialism by the Industrial

Revolution, and is thereby part of very different technological systems, and
a different economy of knowledge. It would be unfortunate if lip-service to

Said denied our temporal framework the measure of specificity due to any

period of historical inquiry. Roman thinking about India may have had
a very powerful context of empire, as Chapters 1 and

4 variously explore;

but that does not mean that the conditions of Roman contact with India

resembled those of British imperialism. It is certainly possible and even
necessary to draw comparisons between modern and premodern versions
of orientalism, but it would be much better for those to proceed from
the material itself, appropriately delimited and contextualised, rather than
a priori. To this question of comparison we shall return in individual chapters and in the conclusion.

The paradigm of Said’s Orientalism continues

to be an important one, providing a critical problem rather than an easy

formula.
19

Edward W. Said, Orientalism (New York: Pantheon, 1978): in a 1995 reprint, Said responds to his
critics.

For a recent dossier, Alexander Lyon Macfie (ed.), Orientalism: a reader (New York University Press,

2000) Among discussions of its relevance to the ancient Mediterranean, Phiroze Vasunia, ‘Hellenism
.

and empire: reading Edward Said’, Parallax 9 (2003), 88-97, offers a spirited defence, while several

Roman historians and archaeologists are favourably inclined: Dialogues in Roman imperialism: power,
discourse and discrepant experience in the Roman empire, ed. D.

1997).

J. Mattingly (Portsmouth, RI: JRA,
Note also M. J. Versluys, Aegyptiaca Romana: Nilotic scenes and the Roman views of Egypt

(Leiden: Brill, 2002).

PART I
Creation ofa discourse

CHAPTER I

Achaemenid India and Alexander

By way of introducing the book as a whole, this chapter strives to outline
the features of Greek Indography, from the earliest texts

up to the late

Hellenistic world of the first century bc, and as far as possible to account for

those features. What were the historical moments at which these ideas were

formulated, and what were their sources? An earlier rendition of this story
offers a three-part chronology:

(i)

Greek writings from Asia Minor from

the later sixth to the early fourth century bc; (2) works based on Alexander’s

campaign, which brought thousands of Greek troops to the Indus Valley

around 327-325 bc; and (3) writing produced by Greek ambassadors sent
1

by Hellenistic states in the third century. This periodisation provides a
plausible starting point, but one that we shall reconsider in the course of

the chapter. Even though several scholars have perceived continuity over
time, the importance of Alexander’s campaign in the production of images
is

a familiar fact, so familiar indeed that we may well ask to what extent

it

tends to be overstated.

2

This question can only be considered by sifting

through Greek accounts before and after the campaign. One of the tasks
of this chapter is thus to assess the campaign as an ethnographic moment,
that is to say, as a defining point in the generation of knowledge about

India and its inhabitants. Throughout these pages we shall be attentive to
the contexts in which India is mentioned, whether in its own right, as part

of a larger schema, or as a passing reference.

1

E. R. Bevan, ‘India in early

2

On the question of continuity and change, see especially Dihle, ‘Conception’; elsewhere, Dihle has

Greek and Latin literature’, in The Cambridge history of India

,

ed.

E. J. Rapson, rev. Indian repr. edn (Delhi: Chand, 1962), vol. I, pp. 351-83, at 353.

emphasised the role of Poseidonius in that continuity (Antike und Orient, pp. 21-6). Also Klaus
Karttunen, ‘The country of fabulous beasts and naked philosophers: India in classical and medieval
literature’, Arctos 21 (1987), 43-52.

II

<u

3
O

"O

c

<s

Qrt

2

Acbaemenid India and Alexander
I.

13

THE EXTENT OF ACHAEMENID POWER

Darius Is rise to power in the Iranian world in 522 was a violent and
perhaps illegitimate one: after crushing the forces of Gaumata, the Magian

(Median) priest known to the Greeks as Smerdis, he quashed a series of
uprisings which allowed him to ‘re-establish [] the people on its foundation,

both Persia, Media and other provinces’, as he was later to say on the
4
Behistun inscription (DB 1.66-7). 3 While
this lengthy inscription, dating
from the early years of Darius’ reign, makes no mention of India, the King

of Kings does mention India among the lands he controls in a slightly later
inscription, at Persepolis (c. 518-513):

Darius the Great King, King of Kings, King of countries, son of Hystaspes, an
Achaemenian. Saith Darius the King: This is the kingdom which I hold, from the
Scythians who are beyond Sogdiana, thence unto Aethiopia; from Sind, thence
unto Sardis - which Ahuramazda the greatest of the gods bestowed upon me. May

Ahuramazda protect me and my royal house. (DPh 1-7: Kent, Old Persian, 136-37,
adapted)

On the strength of this apparent change, and at the same time on the
evidence of Herodotus (discussed below), it has been supposed that Darius

conquered India some time before 513.

It is clear that India,

‘Sind’ in the

inscription, is not merely the easternmost of his provinces; it is specifically,
in Darius’ rhetoric of power, a marker of the extent of his kingdom. In the

Old Persian of the inscription, a language which Darius may in fact have
had created for that purpose, the name of the province is a direct loanword
from the contemporary Sanskrit: the Indian name for the river Indus and its
valley is Sindbu, whereas the Mababbarata uses a different appellation for

the south Asian peninsula, namely Bharat? The royal complex at Persepolis

3

Pierre Briant,

From Cyrus to Alexander: a history of the Persian empire (Winona, IN: Eisenbrauns,

2002), pp. 107-14. On the lists of provinces, Roland G. Kent, Old Persian, 2nd edn (New Haven:
AOS, 1953), e.g., pp. 119 and 136; Willem Vogelsang, ‘The Achaemenids and India’, Achaemenid
History Workshop 4 (1990), 93-110. For the place of India within an Achaemenid (and Zoroastrian)

worldview consisting of ‘seven regions’, see A. Sh. Shabazi, ‘Darius Haft Kisvar’, in Kunst, Kultur und
Geschichte der Achamenidenzeit und ihr Fortleben, ed. Heidemarie Koch and D. N. Mackenzie (Berlin:

Reimer, 1983), pp. 239-46. The recent survey by Bruno Jacobs, Die Satrapienverwaltung im Perserreich
zurZeit Darius III (Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1994), gives Herodotus little credence in reconstructing the
satrapies, privileging instead the retrospective evidence

of the Alexander historians; on India esp.

pp. 243-7 and 261-72.
4

M. A. Dandamaev, A political history of the Achaemenid empire (Leiden: Brill, 1989), p. 144; Dominique
Lenfant, ‘L’Inde de Ctesias’, Topoi 5 (1990), 309-36, at 309 n. 2.

5

Kent, Old Persian, p. 214; David Neiman, ‘Ethiopia and Kush: Biblical and ancient Greek geography’,

Ancient World 3 (1980), 35-42, at 38, with further references. When the author of the Periplus of the
Erythraean Sea speaks of the Indus as ZivOos (34) he appears to be translating directly from the Sanskrit.
Cf. Plin. HN6.7 1: Indus incolis Sindus appellants. Hebrew Hoddu (e.g., Esther 1:1) and Aramaic Henda.

Figure i Indian contingent in tribute procession at the Apadana complex in Persepolis,
sixth century bc. Courtesy of the Oriental Institute, University of Chicago.

also offers visual representations of Indians among the many tribute-bearers

and throne-bearers. On the stairway of the Apadana or audience-hall, each
of the Indians wears a short skirt, baring his chest and legs; they carry jar-

shaped objects, which may correspond to the containers for the gold-dust

mentioned by Herodotus (section I.3 below). 6

I.i.

It is

Scylax and the King ofKings

with Scylax of Caryanda that the history of Greek Indography con-

cretely begins, for it is in connection with him that we find the first explicit

reference to India. 7 Herodotus records that Darius sent Scylax, a sea-captain
6

Erich F. Schmidt, Persepolis, 3 vols. (Chicago: Oriental Institute, 1953—70), vol. I, pp. 70-90 and vol.
Ill, p. 152.

See also Ernst Badian, ‘The King’s Indians’, in Alexander der Grosse ed. Wolfgang Will
,

(Bonn: Habelt, 1998), pp. 205-24.
7

See FGrH 709, esp. F1-7. For modern discussions see esp. F. Gisinger, ‘Skylax’, RE IIIAi (1929),

619-46; cf. also Wilhelm Reese, Die griechischen Nachrichten iiber Indien (Leipzig: Teubner, 1914),
pp. 2-3 and 39-52; Milns, ‘Greek writers’, at 353-5; Dihle, ‘Indien’, RAC, 2-3. Rudolf Giingerich, Die

Kustenbeschreibung in der griechischen Literatur (Munster: Aschendorff, 1950), pp. 9-10, and Pietro
Janni, La Mappa e il Periplo (Rome: Bretschneider, 1984), p. 47, underline his importance in the
literary history of the periplus.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

15

from Ionia, on a mission to explore the sea-route down the Indus and then
from its mouth towards the Arabian peninsula, up to the Suez, i.e. to the
northwest corner of the Red Sea:
Darius was the discoverer of the greater part of Asia. Wishing to know where
the Indus (the only river with crocodiles, save one) ran into the sea, he sent a

number of men, on whose trustworthiness he could rely, and among them Scylax
of Caryanda, to sail down the river. They set out from the city of Caspatyrus, in
the region called Pactyica, and sailed downstream in an easterly direction to the
sea. Here they turned westward, and after a voyage of thirty months, reached the

place from which the Egyptian king

.

.

.

sent the Phoenicians to sail round Libya.

Once the voyage was completed, Darius conquered the Indians, and made use of
the sea in those parts. Thus all Asia, except the eastern section, has been found to
exhibit the same features as Libya. (Herodotus, Histories 4.44)

8

This event has been dated to the early years of Darius’ reign, perhaps

around 519. On this analysis the voyage made possible the conquest of
‘Sind’. 9 From the basis of a modern map it is not clear how Scylax can have

sailed ‘in an easterly direction’ towards the sea, when the Indus runs in a

southwesterly direction. Further, it may well be asked how Scylax was able to

assemble a fleet on the waters of the Panjab in Gandara country.

10

On such

questions of detail the available sources leave us in the lurch. At all events,
the route Scylax took allowed him to discover the shape and position of

Arabia.

11

It is

the lack of plausible details that caused an earlier generation of

modern scholars to doubt the veracity of Scylax’ expedition. The extended
duration of the journey, thirty months, and the apparent lack of information

8

Tfjs Se Acriris tcx -rroAAa utto AapEiou i£eupE0r|, 6; |3ouA6p£vos ’IvSov TroTapov, os KpoKoSsiXous

SeuTepos outos TroTapcov travTcov TrapixETai, toutov tov TroTajJiov EiSivai t rj is ©aAaaaav
ek8i6oT, TripiTEi ttAoioiot

aAAous te toTcjt ettictteue ttjv dAr|0Eiqv ipEEiv Kai 8q Kai IkuAcckcc

av8pa Kapuav8ia. Oi 8i 6ppr|0£VTES ek Kaanorrupou te ttoAios Kai Tfjs riaKTUiKqs yns
ettAeov koto: TroTapov irpos f)co te Kai f)A(ou avaToAas is 0aAaaaav, 8ia 0aAaaar)S 8i irpos
Eorripriv ttAeovtes Tpir)KoaTcp nr)vi dcrriKvio vt ai is toOtov tov x&P ov
o Aiyunricov
PoctiAeus tous OoiviKas tous irpoTEpov Elira anEaTEiAE ttepittAeeiv Aipu-qv. Metoc 8e toutous TTEpiTrAcbaavTas ’lv8ous te KaTEaTpiyaTO AapElos Kai t^ ©aAocaat^ TauTi^ ixpaTO.
Outgo Kai Tfjs Actitis> ttAtiv toc Trpos f|Aiov aviaxovTa, Ta aAAa avEUpriTai onoia TrapEXopivTi Trj
Aipui].

Herodotus presents geographical curiosity as a feature of foreign kings, particularly when
Matthew R. Christ, ‘Herodotean kings and historical inquiry’, Cl. Ant. 13

they plan conquest:

(1994), 167—202, at 175—82. This constitutes, prima facie, an imperial context of knowledge.
9

E.g., Dandamaev, Political history , p. 147; Lenfant, ‘L’Inde’, 309.

10

Vincent A. Smith, The early history of India from 600 bc to the Muhammadan conquest, 4th edn

11

See further Albrecht Dihle, Arabien und Indien’, in Herodote et les peuples non grecs, Entretiens 35

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1957), p. 40.

(Vandoeuvres: Fondation Hardt, 1990), pp. 41-61, at 42.

1

Creation ofa discourse

6

12

But these doubts
about the Persian Gulf have compounded misgivings
have largely been laid to rest with the discovery, during excavations at
.

Suez, of inscriptions which would seem to corroborate Scylax’ journey and

Darius’ acquisition of control over India

13
.

To judge from the paucity of direct references to him, it appears that
he was more known about than known. There are strong indications that
among classical authors he was displaced as a source and authority at an
early stage. Certainly, Aristotle’s single passing refence to Scylax

( Politics

I332b24) is so vague that it could have been at second hand. By the same

when Strabo mentions him as ‘the ancient writer’ it seems that
he implies a venerable authority of the distant past, vaguely known by
token,

reputation rather than specifically referred to by chapter and verse

14
.

Aristotle gives the impression that Scylax was concerned with India’s
political conditions:
Clearly, it is best that the same persons should always be rulers and ruled for all

time. But since it is not easy to attain this, and since there is nothing to match

the difference prevailing among Indians between rulers and ruled, according to
Scylax, it is obviously necessary, for several reasons, for all persons to share equally
in ruling and being ruled in turn. ( Politics I332b2i-27)‘

s

This appears to prefigure the model of ‘oriental despotism’, to use a phrase
coined in nineteenth-century political theory: for Aristotle, India is the
touchstone whereby to measure social relations prevailing in the Greek
world, and Scylax is merely a source guaranteeing the truth value of his
information. Within Aristotle’s framework, this is a dystopian view of society, and it suggests an extrapolation of Greek views about Persian kingship.

But it is also important to emphasise that this is merely a passing reference
to India, and arguably says more about Aristotle than it does about Scylax.

By contrast to this supposedly political element of Scylax, most surviving fragments suggest that monstrous creatures formed the significant

12

Duration: Hdt. 4.44.2; defended by Reese, Nachrichten, p. 39 n. 1. Gulf: Milns, ‘Greek writers’,
354; C.

Muller (ed.), Geographi Graeci Minores (Paris: Didot, 1882), I xxxv is indicative of earlier

scholarship on the issue.
13

Walther Hinz, ‘Darius und der Suezkanal’, Archdologische Mitteilungen aus Iran 8 (1975), 115-21;
more skeptical about a link between the inscriptions and Scylax’ journey is Christopher Tuplin,
‘Darius’ Suez canal and Persian imperialism’, Achaemenid History Workshop 6 (1991), 237-81, esp.
242.

14

6 TraAcuos auyypa^eus (14.2.20 C658

= FGrHTia

,

cf.

Steph. Byz. at T2b). The noun and its

related verb sometimes carry the implication of composing a text or document, as Thuc. 1.1.
15

SfjAov oti (3eAtiov aei tous ccutous tous pev apyeiv tous 6’ apyecrQat KaOdiTa^- ettei 5e toOt’
ou paStov Acc(3eTv ou8’ ecttiv cbatrEp ev ’IvSois <j>r|cn IkuAcc£ eTvcci tous 3 acriAEas toctoOtov 81a(

<J>EpovTCxs tcov apyopEvcov, <f)avEpov oti 5 ia ttoAAcxs

toO Kcrra pEpos apyEiv Kai apyeo-Qai.

amas avayKaTov iravTas opoicos koivcoveTv

Achaemenid India and Alexander

17

part of Scylax’ account. The longest of the fragments mentions Skyapods

(shadow- feet), Otoliknoi (winnowing fan-ears), Monophthalmoi (singleeyes), Henotiknoi (single-child-bearers), Ektrapeloi (monstrous creatures):

thus Tzetzes, Chiliades 7.629-39 (Fyb). To this list Philostratus {VA 3.47

=

F7a) adds Makrokephaloi (big-heads). Lists of this kind are open-ended,
as Tzetzes reminds us when he ends his list by speaking of ‘thousands of

other marvellous phenomena’.'

6

In another such fragment, we have the hint of a context for such creatures, as, for example, in Harpocration, s. v. utto yqv oikoOvtes (F6). The

striking thing here is that Scylax and Hesiod are mentioned in the same

breath, itself a reminder of the occurrence of fabulous creatures in archaic

Greek poetry. For example, Hesiod also talks about Makrokephaloi (fr. 153
M-W). 17 The question, to what extent correspondences between Indian and
Greek marvellous creatures can be explained by common Indo-European
roots is a difficult one at many levels, and is beyond the scope of this study.
Suffice it to note that the marvellous creatures in Greek Indography from

Scylax onward have some precedent in both archaic Greek poetry and in
Sanskrit epic, which reaches even further back in time.'

8

problem is the question of Scylax’ sources. While it
19
there is no direct
is possible that Indian epic was among his sources,
Implicit in this

evidence of any Greek or Roman learning local languages or reading Indian
literature

16
.

17

.

.

through interpreters. 10 If anything, this may well reflect local

Kcci EKTpaTreAoov aAAcov 8e

pupicov ©EapctTcov (Tzetz., Chil. 7.144, line 631

= Fyb).

Gisinger, ‘Skylax’, /?£TII Ai (1929), 627-9. To what extent the Indian Monophthalmoi really invite

comparison with the Cyclopes of Od. 6.5 and book 9, as Gisinger claims with confidence, may
well be questioned. On the slippery history of the Makrokephaloi, whose location is mapped to
the west of Colchis, and once given to the cranial deformation of infants: Hippoc. Aer 14, with

Herrmann, REXlV.i (1928) 815; and Rosalind Thomas, Herodotus in context (Cambridge University
Press, 2000), p. 88.
18

Folklore theory circumvents the need to recover historically the origins of such phenomena, and
explains them instead in terms of common story-telling elements, which may be common even to
societies with no apparent historical link. Given the complicated and largely irretrievable origins of

both the early Greek and Indian verse traditions, and given the common ancestry of Indo-European
roots, the approach has much to offer in a case such as this. Stith Thompson, Motif-index offolkliterature, 6 vols. (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1955-8), abounds with examples of strange

animals; on gold-digging ants, B756.
19

20

Milns, ‘Greek writers’, 354: ‘old Indian books’.
In general, there is very little evidence concerning the ancient equivalents of Dolmetsch-translation:
see, e.g., J.

P.

V. D. Balsdon, Romans and aliens (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,

1979), PP- r 37—8; Dihle, ‘Indien und die hellenistisch-romische Welt in der neueren Forschung’,
Geographia antiqua 1 (1992), 151-9 at 156. Claims that Herodotus knew no language other than Greek,

and was therefore reliant on interpreters, merely underline the degree to which the mechanics of
ethnography were of little interest to the ancient authors: e.g. Josef Vogt, ‘Herodot in Agypten’, in
Herodot. Eine Auswahl aus der neueren Forschung, ed. Walter Marg (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft, 1962 [1929]), pp. 412-33 at 420.

Creation ofa discourse

18

information, from either written or oral sources of mythology.

21

At all

events, it is important to note that the rhetoric of strange animals is fully

present in the very first Greek description of India, and would remain an
integral part of it throughout antiquity and beyond.

There is a further question of language: did Scylax write in Greek, and,
if so, why? Herodotus’ description would suggest that he wrote specifically

with Persian military purposes in mind. Certainly none of the fragments

would encourage us to assume that he wrote in anything but Greek. There
is no hint of translation, nor do the sources suggest that he knew Persian.

Once again, ancient writers tend to gloss over the issue of inter-linguistic
understanding, along with other questions about the means of information
gathering.

What, indeed, are we to make of the work as a whole? 22 On the basis
of historiographic tradition, it would be easier to conceive of Scylax’ work
as a

bald topography than a literary treatment; by the same token, the

marvellous creatures are hard to account for. 23 Indeed, it is impossible to

know how closely the surviving Greek fragments reflect the information he
provided to the King of Kings.

For all the questions they leave unanswered, the fragments of Scylax do
make clear one important fact about the evolution of an image of India.
At the point when India shades into Hellenic consciousness it is in fact the
Indus valley, namely Iranian India as it had been annexed by Darius. Thus
it was to remain for considerable time to come, as subsequent discussion
will show.

1 2 Hecataeus’ cosmos
.

.

Among the three hundred or so fragments of Hecataeus of Miletus, only
eight relate to India, and most of these are merely toponyms and ethnic

appellations preserved in the dictionary of Stephan us of Byzantium. 24 The

second book of Hecataeus’ Periegesis or Periodos ges was devoted to Asia as
a whole, and included Africa as well. Thus we hear of Gandarai and Gan-

droi (F294), Kaspapyrus (F295), Aegante (F297), Callatiae (F298), Opiae

21

Karttunen’s attempts to identify Ctesias’ dog-heads as a neighbouring people are inconclusive: Early

22

There seems to be no particular reason to suppose, with Giingerich, Kiistenbeschreibung, p. 10, that

Greek literature, pp. 180-5.
Scylax wrote his narrative in the first person.
23

Gisinger’s claim, ‘Skylax’, 624, of a literary work is hard to sustain.

24

FGrH with Jacoby’s own commentary ad loc. Equally fundamental is Jacoby’s own article, ‘Hekatios’, RE VII. 2 (1912) 2667-769. Note also Reese, Nachrichten, pp. 57-71; Milns, ‘Greek writers’,
1,

356-8; Dihle, RAC, 3-5.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

19

(F299). 25 In the last of these, after mentioning the Opiae who live along

the Indus, Hecataeus places a desert ( eremie) just beyond the habitation of
Indians. As we shall see, this conception of India as being at the easternmost

end of the oikoumene is continued by Herodotus, and is to become an issue
in Alexander’s campaign. None of the fragments concerning India makes

any reference to monstrous races, a fact that may reflect an emerging rationalism in historical writing.

26

If these fragments give an accurate reflection

of the original text, Hecataeus’ India seems to have been largely restricted
to the listing of peoples and places: the question of naming is one that will

engage us later.

More puzzling is Aelian’s statement that Hecataeus tells of Amphiaraus’

— F33). 27 Amphiamyth about the foundation or

falling asleep while guarding the Indian king {HA 13.22

raus was perhaps part of an aetiological

civilising of India, inviting comparison with Heracles and Dionysus in that

respect. In the absence

of detailed evidence, this seems to be the most

plausible conjecture.

Hecataeus mentioned inland towns and people in a work more comprehensive and larger in scale than that of Scylax: the Periegesis represented a

kind of compendium of Ionian geography. 28 Further, Hecataeus’ work may
be seen as a move towards a critical, rationalising historiography, departing from earlier, more myth-based attempts to make sense of the past. 29
Whereas the periplus form in its strictest sense is well suited to sailing in and

observing the Mediterranean basin, it is less well suited to the geography of
25

Note the question of common identity here, with Herodotus’ Kaspatyrus (3.102; 4.44) and Kallistiae

26

This element of Hecataeus is evident from the very first fragment attributed to him by Jacoby

(3 .

97 )-

FGrH Fia. See further Marcel Detienne, The creation of mythology (University of Chicago Press,
1986 [1981]), pp. 70—9; Peter Derow, ‘Historical explanation: Polybius and his predecessors’, in Greek
historiography ed. Simon Hornblower (Oxford: Clarendon, 1994), pp. 73—90, at 74; Momigliano,
,

‘Historiography on written tradition and historiography on oral tradition’, in his Studies in historiography (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1966 [1961]), pp. 211-20, at 212; John Marincola,

Authority and tradition in ancient historiography (Cambridge University Press, 1997), p. 225.
27

Jacoby in his commentary admits puzzlement concerning context and relevance. Likewise, Bethe,

RE 1.2 (1894) 1886—93, offers no clue as to a possible link between Amphiaraus and India, nor is
there any help in O. Wolff, Ausflihrliches Lexikon der griechischen

und romischen Mythologie ed.
,

W. H. Roscher (Leipzig: Teubner, 1884-6).
28

Jacoby, ‘Hekataios’, 2688, 2699, 2718; Pierre Schneider, L’Ethiopie et llnde. Interferences et confusions

aux extremites du monde antique (Rome: MEFRA, 2004).
29
Momigliano, ‘Fattori orientali della storiografia ebraica post-esilica e della storiografia greca’, Terzo
Contributo alia Storia degli Studi classici e del Mondo antico (Rome: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura,

1966 [1965]), vol. II, pp. 807-18, sees in Hecataeus (as in Herodotus) the crystallising of Greek
tradition at the point when confronted by other traditions of the near East: by this reckoning the
Persians’ westward thrust to the Aegean provided the catalyst for the formation of Greek historiogra-

phy. See also his ‘II razionalismo di Ecateo di Mileto’, Atene et Roma n.s. 12 (1931), 15-44. Hecataeus’

methods are in any case hard to reconstruct: Marincola, Authority p. 166.
,

20

Creation ofa discourse

Asia.

30

But from the evidence of Hecataeus’ work that we do have, there is

no reason to assume that at this stage of our story India is already a unitary
whole; indeed Indians are merely one people among many in the region

around the Indus. 31

While we know Hecataeus visited Egypt (Hdt. 2.143), there is no indication that he travelled to India, and this suggests that he gained his infor-

mation second-hand. 32 Equally, there is no hint that he observed other
marginal people in the course of his sea-voyages, namely, the Ethiopians
in the south, the Celts in the west and the Scythians in the north. 33 It
is

certainly possible that Hecataeus used Scylax as a source, and then in

turn provided Herodotus with his material; but such possibilities cannot

be proven in light of the available evidence. 34 It would be wrong, however,
to exclude oral sources of information about India, stories circulating in

learned circles, of which Hesiod’s fantastic creatures are examples. When

Athenaeus says that both Scylax and Hecataeus compared the shape of the
Indus with an artichoke ( kunara ), there is a faint suggestion that Hecataeus
used Scylax as a source. 35
It is with Hecataeus that the earliest
it is

Greek map can be reconstructed, and

within this overall worldview that we should locate India. The fragments

suggest that Hecataeus conceived of the inhabited world in a disk-shape
in two parts, Europe and Asia/ Africa, above and below the Mediterranean
respectively,

and surrounded by Okeanos. By this scheme India and the

Indus River are in the farthest east. Even if one admits the dangers and
difficulties

of making such a reconstruction, there can be no doubt that

Hecataeus set India into a larger, abstracted scheme of the world. 36 The cartographic significance of Hecataeus’ India is immense, when the only earlier

Greek map of which we can speak, that of Anaximander ( c 610-546 bc),
.

30

Jacoby, ‘Hekataios’, 2718; cf. Giingerich, Kiistenbeschreibung, Janni, Mappa.

31

Dihle {RAC, 3) suggests it was Herodotus who was the first to see India as a unit.

32

Jacoby, FGrH comm, ad frr. 294-99; ‘Hekataios’, 2689-90.

34

The main difficulty in making such an inference is that it is Herodotus himself that gives us our

33

Jacoby, ‘Hekataios’, 2708.

strongest impression of Hecataeus. It has been suggested that Herodotus’ image of Hecataeus owes

more to his imagination than to Hecataeus’ own writings or to oral tradition, as an imaginative
reconstruction: Stephanie West, ‘Herodotus’ portrait of Hecataeus’, JHS hi (1991), 144-60.
35

Athen. 2.82 p. 70

36

J. B. Harley

= 709 F4, cf. Hecat. F296. Jacoby, ‘Hekataios’, 2729-34, discusses this and other

parallels.

and David Woodward, ‘The foundations of theoretical cartography in archaic and classical Greece’, in History ofcartography, ed. Harley and Woodward (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1987), vol. I, pp. 130-47 at 134-5. The much reproduced image purporting to be a ‘reconstruction of the world according to Hecataeus’ (p. 135) should be regarded with special caution, given

the fragmentary nature of the evidence.

,

Achaemenid India and Alexander

21

seems more concerned with celestial than terrestrial mapping, and thus to
have no ostensible interest in India.

I.}.

37

Herodotus and the satrapies

With Herodotus’ Histories Indography takes a new turn. 8 The monstrous
races of Scylax and the toponyms of Hecataeus give way to a more discursive
’

type of ethnographic observation and to a specific focus on Indian gold. In
fact,

the question of Herodotus’ reliance on Scylax and Hecataeus on the

subject of India is one that must remain open. 39 At all events, the Histories

do afford the rare opportunity of seeing these features in the context of a
larger work. There is no Indian logos (excursus) in the full sense that there is
an Egyptian or a Persian logos, for example. Yet as the discussion below will
show, Herodotus’ comments, most substantially at 3.97-106, cover much
the same topics as the fuller logoi, namely, a mixture of physical and human
geography, as if following a standard questionnaire. 40 Embedded within
this passage,

chapter 103 constitutes a kind of sub-subdigression, on the

subject of camels. But even here the emphasis on India’s natural resources
is

maintained, for the camels are used by Indians in their search for gold in

the desert: as we shall see, gold is at the centre of Herodotus’ conception

of India.
Again, the Persian framework is all-important. Following the narrative of Cambyses’ death and Darius’ accession (3.61-87)

comes a descrip-

tion of the reorganisation of the Persian empire undertaken by Darius
(3.89-117). Among the twenty tribute-paying satrapies, beginning with

Ionia in the west, eastern-lying India is the last to be mentioned (3. 94). 41

This division does not include the Paricanii or the Aethiopians of Asia,

who are included in the seventeenth satrapy (also 3.94). The Indians pay
37

Harley and Woodward, ‘Foundations’, pp. 132-4.

38

On India in Herodotus see esp. Dihle, ‘Arabien und Indien’; cf. Reese, Nachrichten pp. 57-71; Klaus
,

Karttunen, ‘The ethnography of the fringes’, in Brill's companion to Herodotus ed. Egbert J. Bakker
,

39

2002), pp. 457-74; cf. the commentary, Erodoto. Le storie ed. David Asheri

et al.

(Leiden:

et al.

(Milan: Mondadori, 1990), vol. Ill, pp. 324-9.

Brill,

,

Questions over whether Herodotus’ work is complete or not cast a certain amount of doubt over
this point; I assume here that the Histories as we now have them represent something like a complete
whole as envisaged by Herodotus. For a recent consideration of Herodotus’ place in the history of

JHS 11 6 (1996), 62-87.
important is Momigliano’s essay, ‘The place of Herodotus in the history of historiography’,

historical writing, see Robert Fowler, ‘Herodotus and his contemporaries’,
Still

reprinted in his Studies in historiography ch. 8.
,

40

On the standard ethnographic ‘questionnaire’, see Chapter 2, section II below.

41

Asheri et al. Erodoto, p. 305; Smith, Early history, pp. 40-1.
,

22

Creation ofa discourse

more tribute than any province, namely 360 talents of gold per year,
which amounts to approximately one-third of the total tribute of the
empire:

The Indians, who are more numerous than any other nation we know, paid a
tribute beyond that of every other people, namely 360 talents of gold-dust. This
was the twentieth satrapy. (3.94.2a) 42

An important feature of this passage is the implication that the wealth of
India can be measured, specifically in this Achaemenid context. Measuring
recurs in Herodotus’ description of Persia, contrasted with Greek virtue
{arete), which resists quantification. 43 Measurement will

demand attention

in later Indography as well, for example in Pliny’s idea of India as a source

of commodities (Chapter 3 below).
If the Persian empire provides the main context for Herodotus’

com-

ments, then the acquisition of gold provides its main focus. As if inspired

by this, Herodotus proceeds to give a brief ethnographic description of India
(3.97-10 6). 44 Indian gold is mentioned several times within these descriptions. 45 Thus we hear of Indians living near the town Caspatyrus and in the

Pactyic country, north of the other Indians, in what is now northeastern

Afghanistan. 46 These, the most warlike of the Indians, live like Bactrians

and get gold from the nearby desert with the help of gold-digging ants
47 Herodotus goes on
to describe how this gold is obtained in the
(3. 102).

42

’Iv8gov 8e TrAqflos te ttoAAco ttAeiotov ectti ttocvtcov tcov t]MeTs i8|jev dvQpcoTrcov Kai <f>6pov
cnrayiveov irpos ttovtccs tous aAAous e^tikovtcc Kai TpiTiKoaia TaXavTa q/qypaTos- vopos

43

David Konstan, ‘Persians, Greeks and empire’, Arethusa 20.1-2 (1987), 59-73.
Within this passage, paragraph 103 constitutes a still further level of digression, concerning the

ElKOCTTOS OUTOS.

44

physiology of the camel supposedly used in the acquisition of gold.
45

To a degree that some moderns, esp. in the nineteenth century, have found hard to understand.
Gregory L. Possehl, Indus age: the beginnings (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1999),

map of gold deposits in ancient India. He makes the following suggestion while
speaking of the alluvial deposits in Afghanistan, Pakistan and northwest India, as opposed to the
p. 232, offers a

deep reefs and veins of southern India: ‘That it is in somewhat short supply today might simply
reflect the fact that the lode deposits were worked out by the

peoples of the Indus Age and their

descendants who sent so much of their wealth to the Persian kings’ (p. 234). The shallower types

of gold-working are much harder to trace archaeologically: F. R. Allchin, ‘Upon the antiquity and

methods of gold mining in ancient India’, JESHO 5 (1962), 195—211.
46

Possehl, Indus age , 234, identifies Caspatyrus (or Caspapyrus) as Kabul and the Pactyic country as

Paktun country, i.e. the land of Pushtus; cf. Barrington atlas ofthe Greek and Roman world, ed. J. A.
Talbert, (Princeton University Press, 2000) map 6 C3.
47

These gold-digging ants have long been a puzzle, admitting no conclusive solution. Several have
invoked the Mahabharata with its references to pipillika (‘ant-gold’): see, e.g., Bevan, ‘India’,
,

p. 356; A. B. Bosworth, ‘Aristotle, India, and the Alexander historians’,

n. 24; Asheri, Erodoto, ad loc.

Topoi 3 (1993), 407-24 at 412

Achaemenid India and Alexander

23

48

The Persians are the

desert and how it is transported on camels (3.104-5).

source of this information:
Such, according to the Persians, is the manner in which the Indians get the greater
part of their gold, some is dug out of the earth, but of this the supply is more
scanty. (3.105.3) 49

The designation of the Persians as the source, repeated in the same paragraph, 50 is in keeping with a common Herodotean formula: a less distant

group is cited as a source of information about a more familiar one. This
is

seen, for example, when the Thracians are mentioned as a source for

ethnographic information for the area beyond the Danube (5.10).

What are we to make of the gold-digging ants? For a long time they
have troubled those concerned with their historicity. Among the many
attempts to explain them, the marmot ( marmota Himalayand) has been

perhaps the most plausible candidate. 51 More significant to note here is
that Herodotus’ discussion suggests that these gold-digging ants, whatever

actual animal they may indicate, are not of the same order of marvel as the

Makrokephaloi and other strange creatures of Scylax. Since the fragments

do not mention them in the same breath it is reasonable to assume that
they derive from a different source of information.
The other specifically Achaemenid context in which Indians appear is the
list of national contingents comprising Xerxes’ army and fleet (7.61—99).
'x
Like the satrapy list above, this catalogue, complete with the names of
48

Between the two passages quoted above there is an inconsistency, in that at 3.94 Herodotus talks
about vpriypcc (from q/qx 00 the frequentative of yaco, hence ‘scrapings’ or ‘gold-dust’), whereas at
’

102 and 104-5 he uses the more normal term xpvcios.
49

Tov |i£v 8q ttAego toO xpvcroO outgo oi ’IvSoi ktcovtou, cos FlEpoai <|>aor aAAos 8e orravicbTSpos
ECTTl EV TT\ Xtbpn OpUCTCTOHEVOS.

50

‘As the Persians say’: cosPlEpoai <|>acji (3.105.2). For Detlev Fehling, Herodotus and his ‘sources’, tr. J. G.

Howie (Leeds: Cairns, 1989), e.g., p. 152, such authenticating formulae are key parts of Herodotus’
‘source-fiction’;

on this passage, pp. 97-8. However, the argument for radical skepsis concerning

Herodotus’ use of sources has been directly answered by several scholars, e.g., Fowler, ‘Herodotus’;

W. Kendrick Pritchett, The liar school of Herodotus (Amsterdam: Gieben, 1993). Francois Hartog,
The mirror of Herodotus: the representation of the other and the writing of history, tr. Janet Lloyd
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988), and Phiroze Vasunia, The gift ofthe Nile: hellenizing

Egypt from Aeschylus to Alexander (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), have shifted the

emphasis from empiricism to representations.
51

The suggestion goes back, in modern classical scholarship, to Christian Lassen’s compendious
Indische Alterthumskunde, 5 vols. (Leipzig: Kittler, 1856-62), vol. Ill, pp. 314-15. Among more recent

supporters of this identification of Murmeltiere-. Reinhold Bichler, Herodots Welt (Berlin: Akademie,

2000), pp. 25-6; Heinz-Gtinther Nesselrath, ‘Herodot und die Enden der Erde’,

20-44. Dihle, RAC, 4; Andrea Zambrini, ‘Gli Indika di Megastene (I)’,
121. There have been many.

MH 52

(1995),

ASNPu (1982), 71-149, at

The issue is usually linked to Herodotus’ reliability. W. Tarn’s suggestion,

The Greeks in Bactria and India (Chicago: Ares, 1997) pp. 104-8, that they were a false intelligence
to cover up the real sources of gold, identified as Siberia, has not worn well. For detailed discussion
see Lenfant, ‘L’Inde’, 311.

Creation ofa discourse

24

commanders and descriptions of armour, also offers insights into the composition of the empire.

It is

organised in such a way that after Persians

and Medes come the eastern nations from Tigris to Indus (7.62-68), then
the southern (7.69—71), then those of Asia Minor (7.72—79)

and finally

those from the Levant (7.89-95). This comes to a total of sixty-three ethnic groups, divided into infantry (7.61-83), cavalry (7.84-88)

and sailors
(7.89-99). The Indians are light-armed foot soldiers, and in this respect they
match some of the other outermost peoples, namely the African Aethiopians (7.69) and Libyans (7.71):

The Indians wore garments made of cotton and carried bows and arrows of reed. In
addition they had iron weapons. They were arranged to march under the command
of Pharnazathres son of Artabas. (7.65)^

The term xulon usually indicates wood, but is used at 3.47.2 to indicate
cotton-producing trees.

Apart from these geographical features, there is no mistaking the human
focus of Herodotus’ Indography. And here the description is qualitatively
different than other authors’ descriptions of marvellous races. The types of

topic he broaches are in keeping with those on the Egyptians, so that we

might speak here of a kind of compacted logos 53
,

At two different points, cannibalism is a feature of Herodotus’ description of India. One of these occurs in the passage under discussion. Among

the Padaei, a nomadic group of the easternmost region, the sickly are killed

by their friends, so that they do not succumb slowly to disease:
If one of their number, whether man or woman, is ill, his closest male friends kill
him (in the case of a man), on the grounds that if he wasted away in sickness his
flesh would spoil. (3.99.1) 54

Likewise the aged are sacrificed and eaten, not that many reach an advanced
age. 55 In the very next paragraph, Herodotus goes on to describe the cus-

tom of other Indians who kill no living creature, nor do they sow or live
in houses; the sickly go instead into the desert in order to die. The obvious

juxtaposition of opposites here may be taken as an example of antinomy
52

’lv6oi 8e Eipctra pcv evSeSukotes coto £uAgov TtETtoiripEva, To^a 8 e xaAapiva eIxov Kai oiarous
KaXapivous' iui 8e a!8r|pos fjv ecttoApevoi psv 813 ficrav outgo 'IvSoi, TrpoCTETETdxcrro 8 e ctuct-

TpaTEUopsvoi <Dapva£a0 pij to ApTapcnro.
s3

Cf. Dihle, ‘Arabien und Indien’.

54

"Os av Kapi] tov cottov, f|V te yuvn t)v te avf)p, tov pev avSpa avSpES oi paAiaTa oi 6piXeovtes
KTEtvoucji, (fapsvoi atrrov TrjKopEvov tt] vouoco to KpEa o<|>ioi 8icq>0E(p£o0ar

ss

Tov yap 8ii es yfipas dmKopevov Suctovtes KaTEUcoyfovTai (3.99.1). The theme of the cannibalism
of the Padaei is picked up at [Tib.] 4.1.144-45 (=3.7.144-45 impia
conuiuia). Cf. Chapter 2,
.

section II. 5.

.

.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

2-5

or polarity, a principle that takes on particular force in the description of
56
In this case, it is at the very eastern fringes of the inhabforeign peoples.
ited world,
is

practised.

immediately adjacent to the eastern desert, that cannibalism
This is in keeping with the Herodotean scheme of a ‘world

in which things become progressively more strange as one moves outward

from (Greek) normality at the centre’. 57 Even so, it has a religious context
(OuaavTEs) In fact, Herodotus gives remarkably little attention to Indian
.

religious practices, if one compares his other ethnographic digressions.

58

Earlier, by way of illustrating the madness of Cambyses, Herodotus tells

a story to illustrate the loyalty each society shows towards

its

accepted

Darius summons the Callatiae, who eat their parents after they

practices.

have died, and asks them what possesses them to do such a deed. The fact
that they flinch at conscious reflection on this custom is for Herodotus
a sign that ‘custom ( nomos )

is

king of all’. 59 This instance of cannibalism

differs from that at 3.99, and indeed from that of the Massagetae (4.26), in

that here people who are already dead are eaten, whereas in the other cases

death is anticipated.

60

If Herodotus’ Indians are a means of discussing cultural difference, the

more somatic considerations of race come to the fore as well. This we see in
the description of the ‘non-cannibalistic’ Indians mentioned above (3.101).

Their skin and their semen are black, and in both respects they resemble
the Ethiopians. The dual mention here of Ethiopians in this short para-

graph suggests that a somewhat familiar people render an unfamiliar one
less strange; certainly the blackness of the Ethiopians is a well-established

56

Polarity

is

an organising principle in Herodotus’ writing, e.g., A. B. Lloyd, Herodotus, Book II:

introduction (Leiden: Brill, 1975), pp. 149-53; more generally, G. E. R. Lloyd, Polarity and analogy:

two types ofargumentation in early Greek thought (Cambridge University Press, 1966), e.g. pp. 342-5
on the course of the Nile. Thomas, Herodotus in context pp. 77-9. aptly warns of the dangers of
extrapolating supposed antitheses between Greeks and barbarians into geographical symmetry (as
,

presented, e.g., on reconstructed maps of older scholarship).
57

John Gould, ‘Herodotus and religion’, in Greek historiography

,

ed.

Simon Hornblower (Oxford:

Clarendon, 1994), pp. 91-106, at 97-9.
58

Dihle, ‘Arabien und Indien’.

59

vonov uccvtcov PaaiAsa (3.38.4), in which Herodotus quotes Pindar (fr. 169.1 S-M). The rich concept
of nomos is glossed by Sally Humphreys, ‘Law, custom and culture in Herodotus’, Arethusa 20 (1987),
211—20; its ethnographic implications explored by Thomas, Herodotus in context pp. 122—33.

60

W. W. How and J. Wells, A commentary on Herodotus 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1912), vol. I, p. 311

,

,

on 4.26. For E. M. Murphy and J. P. Mallory, ‘Herodotus and the cannibals’, Antiquity 74.284 (2000),
388-94, Herodotus’ comments reflect the ‘misunderstanding of a funerary ritual’ of defleshing or
dismemberment. Among the many general discussions of cannibalism, two deserve special mention:

both William Arens, The man-eating myth: anthropology and anthropophagy (Oxford University Press,
of imputing
1979), and Frank Lestringant, Cannibals (Oxford: Polity, 1997), show the dual tendency
the practice to other societies (however that otherness might be determined) while denying

presence in one’s own.

its

26

Creation ofa discourse

commonplace by Herodotus’ time. Again, people at the farthest edges of
the earth are the most unusual. When Herodotus comments that these
people live far from the Persians in a southerly direction, and were not
Darius’ subjects, there is the implication that they do not merit discussion
in an Achaemenid context:

These Indians live far south, far from Persia, and they were never under King
Darius’ sway. (3.101.2)

61

As in so many descriptions of the blackness of the Aethiopians, the focus
is purely somatic, and is not ostensibly accompanied by any moralising
comment. 62
As if the tenor of Herodotus’ Indographic excursus were not clear enough,
he concludes it with some striking comments of a generalising nature. For
Herodotus, India has specific interest for being at the very edges of the earth
(3.106.1), a sentiment he repeats in the very next sentence for emphasis. This
remark emerges as the key to Herodotus’ fascination with India, just as his

famous comment that Egypt has the most marvels ( thomasia) in the world

may be regarded as the key to his obvious fascination with that land:
It seems as if the extreme regions of the earth were blessed

by nature with the most

excellent phenomena, in the same way as Greece enjoys a climate more excellently

tempered than any other country. (3.106.1) 65
Implicit in this comment is a particular kind of fascination about the edges

of the earth, one by which they have a certain advantage over the Hellas; but
then Hellas is blessed with a degree of moderation unique to itself. 64 The
fascination is thus offset. If we compare this passage with those describing

the amount of tribute paid by Indians, then we see in India a coming

together of two central Herodotean concerns: that with marvel ( tboma )
in the broader sense and, more specifically, that with the grandeur of the

Persian empire. In this way India has a specific role to play in telling of the
‘great and wonderful actions of both Greeks and barbarians’ he mentions

61

OuTOl piv TCOV "lv8cOV EKCKJTEpCO T&V tlEpOTCOV OlKEOUCn Kai TTpOS VOTOU &V6|JOU Ka'l AapUoU
paaiAsos ouSapa UTrfjKOUO'ocv.

62

By the same token, Aristotle {Soph. el. 16737-8) contrasts white teeth with black skin, in ways
completely comparable with Greek descriptions of Ethiopians: Lloyd A. Thompson, Romans and
blacks (Routledge: London, 1989), esp. p. 63; Frank M. Snowden, Jr, Blacks in antiquity: Ethiopians
in the Greco-Roman experience (Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press, 1970), p. 258; and cf.

Chapter 2, section II. 6.
63

Ai 5’ scrxcrnai KC°S Tfjs oiKEopevris tcx KaAAicrra eAocxov, Kcnra irep f) 'EAAas tcxs cbpas ttoAAov

64

The balance of the idea is of course stressed in the repetition of KaAAicrra. On India itself as utopia,

ti k&AAicttoc K6Kpr)|JEvas eAaxe.

see Chapter 2, section I II. 3 below.

Achaemenid India and Alexander
in the proem to the first book

65
:

it is

27

simultaneously a vivid marker of the

edges of the inhabited world and an indication of the magnitude of the

Achaemenid empire.

When Herodotus goes on to describe Arabia, he begins by saying that
it is

the southernmost part of the inhabited world

66
.

And he proceeds in

the next sentence to mention Arabia’s wealth in spices, which constitute an

equivalent to Indian gold, just as the Arabian flying snakes and the bat-like
creatures which attack people’s eyes are a parallel to the gold-digging ants.

Again, this is an ethnographic vision centred on commodities.
There is no suggestion that Herodotus’ travels took him as far east as
India. He may have been the first Greek historian to use autopsy, opsis, in
a systematic fashion, but the principle did not apply to his comments on

India 67 It is in his second book that Herodotus most frequently invokes
.

own experience, as a way of counteracting the marvellous element
68
For India, then, it is Scylax, who himself sailed down the Indus, who provides the authority that Herodotus’
own autopsy would otherwise have lent. At all events, it may be that
this less direct authority is one reason why Herodotus’ description of

his

which was so much part of it

.

India is relatively toned down, and less fully worked out than his other
logoi .

69

Herodotus talks of Scylax in such a way as to set him up as the sort of
authority to which he could appeal, in the absence of his own travels to
India. But what of his actual Greek sources? He mentions none explicitly as
such. Most but not all scholars agree that Herodotus did in fact make use of

Scylax 70 Hecataeus too has been suggested as a direct source
.

71
.

Now given

Herodotus’ obvious reliance on Hecataeus in the Egyptian logos, it would
be reasonable to assume that he used Hecataeus on India too, though there

65

66

ipya pEyaAa te kco OcopaaTa, Ta pev "EAAricn, tcc 6e (3ap(3apoiai.
TTpos 6’ au pEcrapppiris kaybri) Apaj3iq tcov oikeopevcov ycopEcov «rn (3.107.1). The overlap in
diction with 3.106.1, quoted above, is striking.

67

Gruido Schepens, VAutopsie dans la methode des historiens grecs du Ve siecle avant J.-C. (Brussels:

AWLSK, 1980), pp. 56-70; Marincola, Authority p. 63. Thomas, Herodotus in context pp. 200-11,
,

,

stands back from the question of historicity with regard to Herodotus’ supposed observation, and
stresses instead the link evident between his language and that of scientific writers; cf. pp. 235-48.
68

Thomas, Herodotus in context esp. pp. 213-48, argues that controversy and polemic underly the
work as a whole, including the digressions and use of the first person.
,

69 Bichler, Herodots Welt,
India.
p. 61, rightly identifies the restrained quality of Herodotus’

70

Jacoby, Reese pro Milns, ‘Greek writers’, 356, contra.
;

71

For an assessment of Herodotus’ debt to Hecataeus, both through ancient statements on the subject

and through inference, see A. B. Lloyd, Commentary vol. I, pp. 127—9. With the partial exception of
Scylax, mentioned as a traveller not a writer (4.44.1), Hecataeus is the only literary source Herodotus
mentions by name. Cf. Dihle, RAC 1996.
,

Creation ofa discourse

28
is

no direct evidence to that effect; and no overlap in content other than

the reference to Kaspaturos. 72
It is clear, on the one hand, that Herodotus has a scholar’s and ethnologist’s eye for the customs of foreign peoples; yet it is impossible to divorce

the focus of his comments entirely from practical interests. This is a prob-

lem for the larger structure of the work: in the earlier books, ethnography
is

pursued on a big scale and seems an end in itself, whereas later it has

a

much lesser role to play. Even in the first four books, the excursuses

serve as explanation for the themes of the work as a whole, both broader

and more specific, and it is in this sense that Herodotus’ ethnographic
habit has been well characterised as a certain ‘access to history’. 73 When

Herodotus focuses on the military capacity of the Indians, we see hints
of not only Achaemenid information, and even of Achaemenid interests.
This same principle would then be true when he begins his description of
Arabia by speaking of its spices in detail at 3.107.1. As in the case of Arabia,

Herodotus’ strong emphasis on commodities is a reminder of the extent to
which the Persian empire provided Greeks with a lens through which to view
India.

I.4.

It is

Marvels and lies of Ctesias

with Ctesias, a Cnidian physician and contemporary of Herodotus,

that the fullest point of pre-Alexander Indography is reached. 74 Despite

the relative profusion of Indographic texts linked with his name, Ctesias
is

a

shady figure, whose life cannot easily be reconstructed. 75 Diodorus

Siculus tells us that Ctesias went to Persia as a prisoner of war (2.32.4). At

the Persian court his medical skills were utilised by Artaxerxes II Memnon
(reigned 405/4-359/8 bc): here he treated the royal family and won the

confidence of the king’s mother. Having remained at the Persian court for
72

Assuming that the same place is being referred to in each case: see the cautious location by

M. Erdosy in Barrington atlas ed. Talbert, map 6 at C3, with Directory.
,

73

Donald Lateiner, The historical method of Herodotus (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1989),
pp. 145-62; cf. Hartmut Erbse, Fiktion und Wahrheit im Werke Herodots (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck

& Ruprecht, 1991), pp. 158-9.
74

Janick Auberger has depicted Ctesias as an intermediate figure between the older Indography of
Scylax, Hecataeus and Herodotus on the one hand, and the new generation of Alexander historians

on the other: ‘Ctesias et l’Orient’, Topoi 5.2 (1995), 337-52. Jacoby’s edition of Ctesias, FGrH 688,
should now be read together with the commentary by Dominique Lenfant, Ctesias de Cnide, La
Perse, Linde (Paris: Belles Lettres, 2004).
75

See esp. the discussions by Truesdell S. Brown, ‘Suggestions for a vita of Ctesias of Cnidos’, Historia

27 (1978), 1-19, and B. Eck, ‘Sur la vie de Ctesias’, REG 103 (1990), 409-34; and compare now the
concise survey by Rudiger Schmitt, ‘Ctesias’, in Encyclopaedia Iranica ed. Ehsan Yarshatar (1993),
vol. VI, pp. 441-6. These efforts owe much to Jacoby’s RE article, ‘Ktesias’ (1922).
,

Achaemenid India and Alexander

29

sixteen or seventeen years, he departed in 398/7. 76 In the preceding year

he had served as an intermediary between the Persian king and Conon of
Athens.

These circumstances suggest that Ctesias had privileged knowledge of
the Achaemenid empire. Given what we know about the presence of Greeks
in Persia, we can safely assume that language was no obstacle to commu-

nication, especially in light of Ctesias’ apparently lengthy sojourn at the
court.

Even if Ctesias did not himself learn to speak Persian during this

time, 77 he would likely have had contact with merchants and other travellers passing through the capital at Persepolis, and perhaps even access to

royal documents.

78

In his capacity as a medical doctor, Ctesias was not unique.

We hear of

one Apollonides of Cos at the court of Artaxerxes I (ruled 465-424; Ctesias
F14 para. 14, from Photius), and at the court of Artaxerxes II there was
also Polykritos of Mende (Ctesias Tyd

= Plut. Art. 21.2). That travelling

doctors were in general a well-known phenomenon can be inferred from
the opening paragraph of Hippocratic Airs waters places, for one. Ctesias

was in fact a contemporary of the historical Hippocrates. The biographies
of various learned persons, not merely doctors, include travel. 79

The medical connection may be taken further. Ctesias’ apparent emphasis

on natural history as opposed to ethnographic description is in keeping

with medical interests, but again it must be asked whether the provenance
of the fragments does not distort the picture, particularly in Aelian. Certainly, there

is

a tendency in Ctesias to focus

on unfamiliar birds and

animals, rather than on the social practices of humans.

80

On the other

hand, geography is neglected, and the fragments offer no reference to the

major city of Taxila. It may be no accident that, with the exception of
Photius, it is principally zoologists and paradoxographers that preserve his

fragments.
76

81

On the timing of Ctesias’ stay and departure: Xen. An. 1.8.26-27; Diod. Sic. 2.32; with Eck, ‘Vie de
Ctdsias’, 427-32, and Schmitt, ‘Ctesias’, p. 442.

77

Eck, ‘Vie de Ctesias’, 413, assumes he did but this is pure speculation. Klaus E. Muller, Geschichte
der antiken Ethnographie

und ethnographischen Theoriebildung (Wiesbaden:

Steiner,

1972-80),

II, p. 145 n. 313, castigates Ctesias for failing to use this unique opportunity, and instead
producing a version which is virtually worthless; likewise A. R. Burn, Persia and the Greeks 2nd
edn (London: Duckworth, 1984), pp. 11-13. In fairness, it must be said that such dismissals are
specifically of non-contemporary Assyrian and Median history.
78
Romm, Edges p. 86; A. T. Olmstead, History of the Persian empire (University of Chicago Press,

vol.

,

,

1948), pp. 380-1.
79

Jean-Marie Andr6 and Marie-Franfoise Baslez, Voyager dans I'antiquite

80

Joan M. Bigwood, ‘Ctesias’ parrot’, CQ 43 (1993), 321-7, at 323.

pp. 229-30; Lenfant, Ctesias, p. xi.
81

See Jacoby, ‘Ktesias’, 2037, for details.

(Paris:

Fayard, 1993),

.

Creation ofa discourse

30

Whereas the Persika consisted of twenty-three books, one book only was
devoted to the Indika Sl The remaining fragments are only eight in number,
but one of them is the fifty-one-section summary by Photius, amounting to
more than twenty-two pages in Jacoby’s edition (F45, from Photius). 83 The
use of the Ionic dialect suggests continuity with the ethnographic tradition

of Hecataeus and Herodotus. This fragment may be taken as typical of
Ctesias’ methods and concerns.

84

The main passage is devoted mostly to a description of India itself:
these are preserved at Bibl. 72 p. 45an-46a37 and p. 46b25-47b4, the two

passages being interrupted by an excursus on the Pygmies. 85 There follows
a description of the Cynocephali and their territory (p. 47b5— 49^9), and

then of three marvellous peoples of India (p. 49b20— 38). Photius adds a
postscript on the credibility of Ctesias (p. 49b39~50a4).

The circumstances of Ctesias’ life are one thing, and the historical value
of his writing is another: its veracity was challenged from as early as Aristotle’s

time.

The tone with which Lucian scorns Ctesias, referred to in

the same breath as Herodotus, shows that his name was already a byword
for mendacity by the second century ad.

86

The reception of Ctesias is a

matter in its own right. However, it appears that Ctesias himself made a
point of challenging Herodotus’ authority. Now Herodotus himself was

much criticised as a liar, 87 and Ctesias’ criticism is, apart from anything
else, a testimony to Herodotus’ importance for the evolution of Greek his-

toriography. As regards India, this is a matter of rival claims to authority.

By now marvels are a severe challenge to historical writing: it is particularly at the edges of the earth that Herodotus is open to criticism for
lying.

The marvel, so important to Ctesias ethnography with its tendencies
towards natural history, became an embarrassment to the development of a

82
83

Phot. 45a2o; Aelian 16.31; Paus. 9.21.4.

This may be regarded as one of Photius’ many ‘book-reviews’, to use the term of N. G. Wilson,
Scholars ofByzantium (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983), p. 93.

84
J.

M. Bigwood, ‘Ctesias’ Indica and Photius’, Phoenix 43 (1989), 302-16. On the other hand Eck,

‘Vie de Ctesias’, 425, is more sceptical about the extent to which Photius remains true to Ctesias’
original.
85

A schematic survey of the relevant fragments is given by Reese, Nachrichten pp. 73—6.
,

86

Lucian Ver. hist. 1.3 and 2.31 combines Herodotus and Ctesias as targets of scorn. (Jacoby does not
include Lucian among the testimonia on Ctesias.) See esp. J. R. Morgan, ‘Make-believe and make
believe: the fictionality of the Greek novels’, in Lies andfiction in the ancient world, ed. Christopher

Gill and T. P. Wiseman (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1994), pp. 175-229.
87

Most famously Thuc. 1.22, where he is not named, and Plutarch’s de malignitate Herodoti (though
in neither critique do the ends of the earth feature); for a survey of his reception see Momigliano,
‘Place of Herodotus’, in Studies in historiography.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

3i

new kind of historiography that was beginning to emerge. 88 This is one possible reason

why Ctesias became so vilified by the writers of self-consciously

serious history.

When the Indography of Ctesias is so different in character

to that of the earlier writers discussed above, it is perhaps useful at this

point to invoke a passage attributed to Herodotus’ younger contemporary,
Hellanicus of Lesbos (c. 480-395 bc): according to a later mythographer,
‘Hellanicus says that there is a spring called Sille, in which not even the
lightest objects can float.’

89

Now we know that Hellanicus wrote extensively

on ethnography and geography, but this is his only reference to India, and
the circumstances of its survival are such that we have no context for it. But
it does suggest that by the later fifth century there was talk of the wonders
of India beyond the strange creatures of the kind mentioned in Scylax. On
the strength of this, it appears that Ctesias was not the first to produce the
kind of Indography for which he would later become notorious.
Despite references to a Persian sojourn, Ctesias at no point claims to
have visited India. Among many attempts to defend him from ancient and
modern criticism, 90 some have claimed that Ctesias did not see India itself,
yet saw Indian animals, plants and other objects at the Persian court. This
claim should be taken seriously as a way of refining the concept of autopsy
or personal observation, one that is so important to classical historiography.

Various studies of the phenomenon have shown that even some small aspect

of autopsy in a tradition can result in elaborate claims about truthfulness:
i.e.

if an earlier

author saw something, then those using his work could

themselves claim authenticity. 91

It

follows that Ctesias’ claims to having

seen ‘Indian things’ himself, may mean that he had himself seen Indian
objects and perhaps people at the Persian court.

By way of assessing the character of his Indology, it is worthwhile to
distinguish between Ctesias as a source and Ctesias as a historical figure,

between writer and traveller. To make this distinction is to go against the
grain of an ancient tendency to tend to conflate the two: in many cases, it

seems, to question the veracity of a writer’s travels is a way of questioning
his authority as a source.

88

Momigliano, ‘Tradizione e invenzione in Ctesia’, in his Quarto Contributo (Rome: Edizione di Scoria

89

‘EAAocvikos ev ’IvSoTs eTvcu (Jvqcn Kp-qvqv ZlAav KaAoupEvr|v,

90

The many articles of Bigwood and Karttunen deserve mention here among modern discussions of
Ctesias. Typically of earlier writers, Bevan (‘India’, p. 356) accuses him both of being a ‘deliberate

e Letteratura, 1969 [1931]), pp. 181-212 at 211; cf. Emilio Gabba, ‘True history and false history in
classical antiquity’, JRS 71 (1981), 50-62.

ti^etcci {Paradoxogr. Vatic. Rohde 36

91

Kai tcx EAa^poTorra KaTomrov-

= FGrH 4 F190).

liar’ and of plundering the material of others, provided it was ‘sufficiently sensational’.
Autopsy was not so absolute as it might initially seem: Thomas, Herodotus in context pp. 235-47.
,

32

Creation ofa discourse

-

How are we to understand the intentions lying behind the work? Little is

gained by claiming that ‘Ctesias, again like Scylax, seems to have

composed his Indica primarily to entertain rather than inform his Greek
audience 92 For one thing, broader trends in fourth-century historiography make the fantastic elements in Ctesias seem rather like ‘an important
step in the development toward a kind of historiography distinguished by
pathos or melodrama 93 To be sure, it has been claimed with justification
’.

’.

that Ctesias was an originator of the historical romance, at the very least
that certain types of prose narrative may be traced back to his work 94 Yet,
.

as soon as we cease to retroject modern notions about truth and fiction, it

becomes clear that such claims minimise the historical value, if not historiographical aims, of the work in favour of supposed entertainment value.

Recent work on the novel has made it clear that ‘historical’ and ‘fictional’
elements can coexist in the same work 95 In fact, it is a feature of the Greek
.

novel, being the latecomer that it was, to be receptive to elements usually

linked with other genres 96 An eastern setting is common to many nov.

els,

though sometimes the eastern connection is little more than a title; it

implies nothing necessarily about any possible eastern origins of the story
involved.

It is

indeed possible that the novel’s own concern with truth-

fulness and fictionality has some bearing on the reception of Ctesias. At

any rate it would be wrong, on the basis of such considerations, to rule
out the possibility of a political role played by the circulation of a work
such as Ctesias’, on similar lines to those which have been suggested for

Megasthenes 97
.

What of Ctesias’ sources? A recent scholar, perhaps with a sense of apology for the marvellous character of his tale, points to ‘intermediaries who
were not necessarily well-informed 98 Such a suggestion merely adds an
’.

additional tier of speculation, and as such achieves little. Ctesias claims to

have seen a manticore ( martikhora ) at the Persian court, brought there as a
royal gift:

92

Romm,

95

Tomas Hagg, ‘Callirhoe and Parthenope: the beginnings of the historical novel’, CL Ant. 6 (1985),
184—204; cf. Momigliano, ‘The historians of the ancient world and their audiences: some sugges-

93

Edges, p. 86.
Schmitt, ‘Ctesias’, 444.
94 E.g., Jacoby, ‘Ktesias’,
2045; Schmitt, ‘Ctesias’, 442.

tions’,

ASNP 8 (1978), 59-75, at 74; Oswyn Murray, ‘Herodotus and Hellenistic culture’, Classical

Quarterly 22 (1972), 200-13, at 212.
96

B. P. Reardon, Theform ofGreek romance (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991); Tomas Hagg,

The novel in antiquity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983).
97 Susan Sherwin- White and Amalie Kuhrt, From Samarkhand to Sardis; a new approach to the Seleucid
empire (London: Duckworth, 1993); see section II. 2 below.
98

Joan M. Bigwood, ‘Ctesias, his royal patrons and Indian swords’, ///£ 115 (1995), 135-40, at 140.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

33

Ctesias states that he has indeed seen this animal in Persia, after it had been brought
as a gift to the king of the Persians - if in fact Ctesias has credibility in matters of
this kind. (F45d(3

= Aelian, Historia animalium 4.21)"

In the same paragraph, Aelian states that Ctesias himself appealed to local

knowledge to substantiate his claims: ‘so states Ctesias, and he says that
100
Whatever may be the historical reality
Indians [writers?] agree with him’.
behind this creature, the tale may offer an important pointer. To be sure, a
great many of the Indian things Ctesias mentions he could have seen at the
Persian court: wine and cheese (Photius 49b3), oil (49326), light-coloured

Indians (463.26) and rare animals. These are the kinds of object the King

of Kings received as presents and tribute from his subjects.

101

The above account makes clear that Ctesias was important in the integration of the truth/falsity distinction into historical writing. This same
distinction, and with it the figure of Ctesias, is important to the different

genesis of the Greek novel. Though only one of the twenty-three books

of Ctesias’ Persika concerned India, it was India more than anything that

determined Ctesias’ subsequent reputation among later authors. In this
way, India itself was central to the development of Greek historiography.

What is more, India’s very marginality gave it a privileged position in the
early history of Greek map-making, as a marker of the edges of the world,
in the cosmologies of Hecataeus and Herodotus.

When Alexander III of

Macedon succeeded his father Philip II in 336 BC there was thus already a
vivid Greek notion of India.

II.

ALEXANDER AND AFTERMATH

II. i.

A conqueror and his historians

It is with Alexander’s eastern expedition that the

body of information about

India reached new levels of complexity. To judge from the profusion of

Alexander histories, there can be no doubt that the campaign marked a
period when suddenly a great deal more information about India was available.

However, specific questions posed here are whether this was a retro-

jection of later times, and whether the influx of new information was one
99

AEyei 8 e koci EopccKEvai to5e to £coov ev FTEpaais KTT)aias e£ ’IvScov kopictOev Scbpov tw FlEpacbv
(3 ccctiAeT,

ei

5r)

too ikccvos TEKpripiaxjai

Omp tcov toioutcov KTT]cnas. For discussion of this

passage, Lenfant, ‘L inde’, 315—16, and Christopher Tuplin, ‘Parks and gardens’ Achaemenid studies
(Stuttgart: Steinev, 1996), p. 109.
100

XfiyEi 5e apa KTT]CTias Ken <J>T]aiv opoAoyEiv ocutco tous ’Iv5ous. The manticore is further discussed

101

Aelian 4.21, 46; cf. Jacoby, ‘Ktesias’, 2037.

in Chapter 3 below.

.

Creation ofa discourse

34

of quantity more than quality. As we try to reconstruct Alexanders Indian
expedition historically, the problems encountered are in many ways typical
of the problems of Alexander history in general. Major difficulties stem

from the fact that the earliest extant histories come some three centuries
after the fact, however faithfully they might have reflected the contempo-

rary accounts of Callisthenes, Onesicritus, Aristobulus and Nearchus; and

even then there are serious questions about bias in the earlier sources, as
far as they can be reconstructed. Nonetheless a substantial historical record
exists, which has been subject to extensive source criticism. 102

Alexander’s campaign in India (summer 327 to autumn 325 bc) itself
deserves consideration, as perhaps antiquity’s most celebrated journey of
discovery. The basic story can be found most fully in Arrian’s Anabasis 5-6,

where the campaign is marked as a major episode in its own right. 103 The

most important of the other ancient accounts are those of Curtius Rufus’
History of Alexander the Great 8.9-9.10 and Plutarch’s Life of Alexander

57-66. 104 Since so many modern historians have already crafted a narrative
on these lines, here it is necessary to rehearse only the barest outline of the

campaign, so as to be able to consider selected features. 105
Alexander, having

moved through what is now Afghanistan, is well
106

received at the city of Taxila.
The ruler Taxiles allies himself with Alexander in the hope of gaining support against his neighbours, Abisares and

Porus. Abisares submits to Alexander but Porus resists. Alexander cannot

remain in Taxila but is sufficiently interested in what he sees there to send his

102

Of the major contributions to source criticism embracing more than one author, the studies of
Jacoby and Lionel Pearson, The lost histories ofAlexander the Great (Philadelphia: APA, i960), has
yet to be replaced, despite being somewhat outdated; cf. more recently A. B. Bosworth, From Arrian
to Alexander: studies in historical interpretation (Oxford: Clarendon, 1988). On the general problems
concerning sources in Alexander history see, e.g., Simon Hornblower, ‘Sources and their uses’,

CAN 2nd edn (1994), vol. VI, pp. 1—23; and Pearson, Lost histories, —
i

103

2.1.

A. B. Bosworth, A historical commentary on Arrian’s History of Alexander (Oxford: Clarendon,
1995 ), vol. II, p. 9, compares Herodotus’ style of digressing.

104

Diod. 17.84-105 and Justin 12.7.4-12.10.7 should also be compared.

105

Among recent narrative histories the following are significant: Jakob Seibert, Alexander der Grosse
(Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1972), pp. 155-70, with his particularly detailed
maps, esp. no. 26; P H. L. Eggermont, Alexander’s campaigns in Sind and Baluchistan (Leuven:

and Alexander’s campaigns in Southern Punjab (Leuven: Peeters, 1993); E. Badian,
‘Alexander in Iran’, in Cambridge history ofIran (Cambridge University Press,
1985), vol. II, pp. 420Peeters, 1975),

501, at 461-75; Badian, ‘Alexander at Peucelaotis’,

CQ 37 (1987), 117-38; A. B. Bosworth, Conquest

and empire (Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 119-39. See now also Frank L. Holt, Into the
106

land of bones: Alexander the Great in Afghanistan (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005).

Ahmad Hasan Dani, The historic city of Taxila (Tokyo: Centre for East Asian Cultural Studies, 1986)
This updates the three-volume report of excavations undertaken in 1913-14: Sir John Marshall,
Taxila: an illustrated account of archaeological excavations
P.

.

.

.

(Cambridge University Press, 1951); cf.

M. Fraser, Cities ofAlexander the Great (Oxford: Clarendon, 1996), pp. 159—60.

Achaemenid India and Alexander
officer Onesicritus to find out more about its sages.

35

One of these philoso-

phers’ attaches himself to Alexander’s entourage for some time, and later,

upon becoming ill at Persis, freely goes to his own death on a burning pyre.
The battle with Porus at the Hydaspes (Jhelum) brings the campaign to a
climax. Once the troops are lined up on opposite sides of the river, Alexander uses a ruse to distract the enemy, and deploys his cavalry, which proves

more effective than Porus’ elephants. King Porus is captured in battle but
Alexander, impressed by his bravery and imposing physique, spares him,

and gives him the status of a vassal potentate. In the battle Alexander loses
his horse, Bucephalus. It is buried with pomp, and the newly established
107
settlement of Alexandria Bucephala is named in its honor
A definitive moment is reached at the river Hyphasis (Beas), at which
.

point Alexander’s troops refuse to go any farther, whereas he himself still has
a burning desire to press on till the Eastern Ocean

grievances of the soldiers are expressed

first

108
.

The long-festering

in informal meetings,

and

then to Alexander by Coenus, the senior phalanx commander. At a second

meeting Alexander finds that he cannot persuade his troops or officers
to venture farther east with him. After three days spent alone he finally
accepts the decision to turn back, thereby reaching reconciliation with his

men.

When he returns to the Hydaspes in late September he finds that a
fleet is

already being built at the newly founded cities of Bucephala and

Nicaea, both located in the vicinity of the encounter with Porus. This fleet
consists in the main of light transport craft, which were to carry horses,

troops and provisions down to the southern ocean, under the command of

Nearchus, assisted by Onescritus

109
.

While the ships carry most of the cav-

some 200 elephants
move on foot under the leadership of Craterus and Hephaestion. Alexan-

alry, hypaspists and archers, the rest of the troops and

der’s

own activities at this time are directed against the Oxydracae (Ksu-

drakas) and Malli (Malavas), located on the lower reaches of the Hydraotes.

Indigenous resistance is concentrated in a number of strongholds and met

with a particularly ferocious response

110
.

It is during an assault

on the citadel

of the Malli that Alexander is impaled by an arrow in the chest, and only
narrowly escapes death thanks to surgery performed by Critobulus of Cos.

107

Fraser, Cities ofAlexander, pp. 161—2.

108

The troublesome but important question of Alexander’s aims will be discussed below.
The question of the relative roles of Nearchus and Onesicritus is assessed by Waldemar Heckel,

109

The marshals ofAlexander's empire (London: Routledge, 1992), pp. 228-30.
110

A. B. Bosworth, Alexander and the East: the tragedy of triumph (Oxford: Clarendon, 1996), esp. pp.
133—41, stresses the ferocity of the campaign in general and this encounter in particular.

Creation ofa discourse

36

To what degree can we reconstruct Alexander’s intentions as he moved
eastward? How far did he plan to go?

111

If the historical reconstruction of

intentions is a questionable exercise at the best of times, and one of the
least plausible aspects of ‘great man’ historiography,

then the character of

the sources makes

it all the more so in this case. Yet this is a topic we
must consider, because of its prominence in the Greek and Roman texts,

and because those texts give geographical knowledge itself a role in the
question. According to Arrian (Anabasis 5.26), Alexander tries to encourage
his troops at the Hyphasis by claiming that their goal, the Eastern Sea, is

not far away. In Arrian’s account, the military discourse of encouragement
is

mixed with a scientific theorem, one involving the geography of the

east.

112

If anyone wishes to hear what will be the limit of the fighting, he should know that

there remains no great expanse of land before us up to the river Ganges and the
eastern sea. This sea, I tell you, will prove to be joined to the Hyrcanian sea; for the
great sea encircles all the land. And it will be for me to show both Macedonians

and allies that the Arabian Sea forms a continuous stretch of water with the Persian
Gulf, and the Hyrcanian Sea with the Arabian Sea. From the Persian Gulf our fleet
shall sail round to Libya, as far as the Pillars of Heracles; from the Pillars all the
interior of Libya then becomes ours, just as all of Asia is in fact becoming ours,
and the boundaries of our empire here are becoming those which the god set for
the entire continent. (5.26.1— 2) 113
If we are to take this passage seriously, there might be a point in thinking

of the famous marvels of India in an early context: that of soldiers on the

campaign. Certainly fear is a major part of the campaign narratives. Rivercrossings and battles provide several moments at which this factor reaches
crisis-point. At many stages the solders’ fear is contrasted with Alexander’s
111

A recent review of the scholarly literature on this subject stresses the early months of 330 bc, and
esp. the death of Darius as the conspiracy of Bessus, as the turning point in Alexanders objectives:

ZPE

112

M. B. Hatzopoulos, ‘Alexandre en Perse: la revanche et l’empire’,
116 (1997), 41-52.
Cf. Curt. 9.2.26. Bosworth aptly points out the persuasive force of this argument over Alexanders
soldiers: ‘Aristotle’, 422. There are good reasons to doubt the extent of Alexander’s knowledge about

the Ganges: T. R. Robinson, ‘Alexander and the Ganges: the text of Diodorus 18.6.2’,

AHB 7 (1993),

84-99; cf. Bosworth, Alexander and the East 186-200.
,

113

e!

6e tis kcu auTco tco ttoAepeiv ttoOeT aKouaai 6 ti TtEp laTai TtEpas, pa0STco oti ou ttoAAti

eti r|pTv

Aoiirf) ecttiv ectte

f)

AEyco upiv,
f)

piEydAT]

ett'i

£uva<j)fis <t>avETTai

f)

TtoTapov te rayy-pv Kai Thv Ecqav 0aAaaaav tocutt] 5e,
‘YpKavla OaAacraor EKHEpiEpyETai yap yf^v itEpi Traaav

0aAaaaa. Kai syco etti6ei£co MaKsSoai te Kai toTs ^uppayots tov pev

koAttov £uppouv ovxa tco FlEpaiKcp, tt^v 8e 'YpKaviav

’IvSikov

<0aAaaaav> tco ’IvSikco- orrro 8e

toO FfEpaiKoO E 15 Ai|3ur)v -rr£pnTAEua0f)a£Tai cttoAco f]p£T£pco Ta peypi 'HpockAeous Itt)Acov
atro 5e Ztt)Acov f) evtos Aipur) Traaa rjpETEpa ytyvETai Kai f) Aaia 5ti outgo Traaa, Kai
opoi tt\s TauT-q apyhs ouatTEp Kai Tfjs y^S Aipurj Traaa fjpETEpa yiyvETai Kai f) Aaia
5f) outgo Traaa, Kai opoi tt^s toutt^ apyns ouaTTEp Kai Trjs
y% opous 6 0eos EtroiriaE.

On the significance of this passage see esp. Bosworth, ‘Aristotle’, 422.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

37

bravery. If fear of unknown terrors lying ahead was indeed a factor among
soldiers on the campaign,

we can merely speculate how this might have

impacted on the stories about the campaign told in the Greek world. Preexisting tales about marvellous creatures at the ends of the earth will have
been in the minds of soldiers, as indeed they would have been in the minds
of the audiences of the Alexander histories.

To be sure, Alexander was encouraged by Indian potentates who were
under pressure as a result of conflict with their neighbours. His intervention

was brief, and had the net effect of changing the balance of power between
these potentates. These ‘invitations’ at least gave Alexander a pretext by

which to intervene, much as revenge earlier provided a pretext for his
initial

incursion into Persia. This is less a matter of real motive than of

legitimisation and propaganda.

Emulation counted for a great deal in the sphere of propaganda. Stories
about Heracles and Dionysus had a certain validating function in Alexander’s own self-presentation. The question of emulation is one that merits

namely emulation ofAlexander. If this
was to prove a major theme in the self-presentation of Roman leaders
114
later,
then we shall have to consider the role of India in those processes
later discussion in other contexts,

of self-presentation.
But, again, how far did Alexander really intend to go? Curtius’ comment,
for example, that Alexander intended to make for India and from there for
115

Ocean, is not necessarily of great value in historical reconstruction. Given
the temporal distance between the surviving Alexander historians and their

and given Alexander’s own charisma, this is exactly the kind of
issue that will have been most prone to distortion. Alexander did receive
reports that the Ganges lay twelve days’ march beyond the Hyphasis, and

subject,

these reports could have encouraged him,"

6

despite the fact that he could

expect grim going all the way, and then the Ganges’ east bank to be densely

populated with hostile groups. This information was awkward enough
for him to disbelieve or dissimulate to his troops." 7 It is very likely that

geographical misconceptions (or even conscious misrepresentations) played
a part in Alexander’s strategy: whatever Alexander might have thought, his

assertion that Ocean was nearby seems to have had the effect of revitalising
his exhausted troops. In principle, there would have been every reason for

114

On problems surrounding Alexanders exemplary status, see Pierre Vidal-Naquet, ‘Flavius Arrien
entre deux mondes’, in Pierre Savinel (tr.), Arrien, Histoire dAlexandre (Paris: Minuit, 1984), esp.

1,5

117

PP- 330-43ceterum Indiam et inde Oceanum petiturus (8.5.1).
Plut. 62.2; Arr. 5.25.2; Just. 12.8.10-15.

116

Cun. 9.2.5.

Creation ofa discourse

38

Alexander to think of India as the eastern edge of the world, in keeping with
the Hecataean and Herodotean conceptions mentioned above. It was only
after Alexander’s expedition that India was no longer thought to lie on the

eastern edge; now glimmers of knowledge about the Ganges appeared." 8

To what extent that is the product of retrospective fabulation on the part
of later historians is unclear, yet it seems likely that it reflects the situation
of the campaign itself. In the Romance tradition this desire of Alexander to
proceed beyond the Hyphasis is transformed into the supposed fact of his
actually having done so." 9

In this narrative, rivers hold an ambiguous position. Significantly, the

Hyphasis (Beas) is presented as a border of knowledge. Arrian discusses the
pre-eminence ol the Indian rivers among all those of Asia, and ends his
description by keeping open the possibility that says that there might be

even greater rivers in India, unknown to him. This passage is remarkable

both for the role of the Hyphasis and for the fact that Arrian suspends his

own authority:
It is possible that also

many other greater rivers run through India. But I can make

no accurate assertions about territory on the other side of the Hyphasis, because
Alexander did not get beyond the Hyphasis. ( Indica 3.10-4.1) 110
This sentiment is matched at 6.1 and Strabo 15.1.37 C702, the latter being
particularly interesting since it states explicitly that India’s remoteness and

the consequent ignorance of writers leads to exaggeration

and marvelmongering. (Strabo goes on to instance gold-digging ants.) On the other

hand rivers are also a rationalisation of space, in this case articulated in
retrospect, in such a way that the narrative easily focuses on these points. 111
The military story of Alexander’s campaign is punctuated and segmented

by the rivers crossed, particularly in Arrian’s account.

One river, the Hydaspes, is also the path of travel, and likewise the
Acesines, another tributary of the Indus. In the narrative of Nearchus’

voyage, which begins with the river journey down to the Indus delta, these

two rivers fulfil a very different role (chapters 18-19). 112 As Arrian hastens to
remind us, the bulk of his story concerns Nearchus’ voyage from the mouths
118

Dihle, RAC, 6 with reference to earlier writing.
,

119

E.g., Alexander Romance (rec.

y) 2.35a.i5; cf. the Byzantine poetic version (cod. Marc. 408), lines

4811, 4840 and 4858.
120

Kai -ruyov xai aAAoi TroAAoi proves TTOTapoi ev Trj ’I v6cov yfj psouoiv. aAAa ou poi crrpEXEs UTTEp

tcov ETtEXEiva 'Y^aoios TtoTapou iCTXUpiaacjQai, oti ou TTpooco toO 'Y<t>acnos fjAOsv AAE^avSpos.
121

On Herodotus’ keen sense of the limits of knowledge see, e.g., Lateiner, Historical method,
pp. 146-7.

122

On rivers as boundaries or connectors of people, Franz Schon, ‘Fluss’, in Mensch und Landschaft in
der Antike. Lexikon der historischen Geographie, ed. Holger Sonnabend (Stuttgart: Metzler, 1999),

,

Achaemenid India and Alexander

39

of Indus to the Persian Gulf (19.9), and it is Nearchus’ own account that
forms its factual basis (20.1).
Asceticism is one feature that impressed Alexander’s entourage. The rig-

orous discipline and self-sacrificing ways of the Indian philosophers struck a

chord for Onesicritus, who claimed to find in their lifestyle an analogue and

model for Cynic philosophy. 123 This episode predicts the fascination that
Christians would come to have with the Brahmans and Gymnosophists, as
will be discussed in Chapter 6. Important for current purposes is Calanus,

who is a key to the formation of this image, creating as a he did a model of
both self-mortification and social criticism, as Strabo 15.1.64 C715, for one,
reveals.

The angles of self-control and criticism point in the direction of

an emerging concept of ascetic practice, one that would later come to have
philosophical and religious implications in the world of early Christian
asceticism.

124

Onesicritus was instructed to meet with the philosophers. They would

not themselves be summoned, and Alexander wished neither to go himself

nor to force them. At a distance of fifteen stadia from the city Onescritus

found fifteen of them, sitting naked in various postures on the stones. He
spoke to Calanus, one of them, and is told also to sit naked on the stones so
that he can hear the teaching of the wise men.

When Onesicritus says that

he was sent to learn about wisdom and report back to Alexander, Calanus
proceeds to rail against gluttony and luxury. In a kind of Golden Age legend

he tells of an earlier time when the world produced goods in abundance;

now people had lost self-control and returned to satiety and arrogance, and
as a result the world had declined. Another sage, Mandanis (also referred to

in the sources as Dandamis), is more conciliatory at first in his attitude to

the Greeks, and rebukes Calanus as arrogant for having made Onesicritus

undress and be seated in discomfort.
pp. 145-50; on later antiquity, C. R. Whittaker, Frontiers ofthe Roman empire: a socio-economic study

(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994), pp. 2 6 and 61.
123

See further Truesdell S. Brown, Onescritus (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1949); Dihle,

RAC, 7; James S. Romm, ‘Dog heads and noble savages: Cynicism before the Cynics?’, The Cynics:
the Cynic movement in antiquity and its legacy, ed. R. Bracht Branham and Marie-Odile GouletCaze (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), pp. 121-35, at I22 On Onesicritus as historian
-

see esp. Pearson, Lost histories, pp. 83-111, who stresses his link with Xenophon, and Paul P6dech,
Historiens companions dAlexandre (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1984), pp. 71-158. Apparently he is the first

Greek to mention Taprobane, modern-day Sri Lanka (FGrH 134 F12-13 = Strabo 15.1.15 C690 and
Pliny
6.81; cf. Meg. F26): D. P. M. Weerakkody, Taprobane: ancient Sri Lanka as known to
Greeks and Romans (Turnhout: Brepols, 1997), pp. 27-9, and Stefan Faller, Taprobane im Wandel

HN

derZeit (Stuttgart: Steiner, 2000), pp. 29—34.
124

Note esp. Derek Krueger, ‘The bawdy and society: the shamelessness of Diogenes in Roman imperial
culture’, in The Cynics ed. Branham and Goulet-Caz£, pp. 222-39; A. Brian Bosworth, ‘Calanus
and the Brahman opposition’, in Alexander der Grosse, ed. Wolfgang Will (1998), pp. 173-204.

9

40

Creation ofa discourse

The very name of Calanus is an act of translation. 115 Plutarch tells us that
he received that name from the Greeks because he greeted them with kalyam,
the Sanskrit form of the greeting khaire (Alex. 65.5). Since this supposed
Sanskrit greeting makes no sense as it stands, it has been understood instead
as kalyanam, hence the proximity to the name as it occurs in the Greek and

Roman sources. 126 Sphines, his real name according to Plutarch, cannot be
linked to any known Indian name.

Names are not the only problem in making sense of Calanus. For examhow are we to square Calanus’ own eulogising of the king (e.g., Strabo

ple,

15.1.68 C717) with the frequent criticism by the later historians that the con-

temporary writers would flatter Alexander? 127 In this passage Strabo accuses
the sages themselves of impetuosity and lack of self-control, which is after
all

what they most profess to teach. But it is clear that Calanus, through his

link with Onescritus and thence Diogenes and ultimately Socrates, stands
at a particular moment in the history of social criticism and of asceticism,

representing a special kind of ‘alien wisdom’.

Stepping back a moment from the narrative, we should consider the
sources used by the Alexander historians. Two writers who stand out for

having dealt with this most easterly part of the campaign are Nearchus and
Onesicritus, these two being identified as admiral and helmsman of the
fleet respectively (Arrian, Indica 18.9-10). This has been taken to

mean that

Nearchus was in overall command, Onescritus in charge of navigation. 128
It is

Nearchus who is cited by Arrian as the main source for the narrative

section of his Indica

lz
.

To consider the question of sources at a further remove: from whom did
Callisthenes and other contemporary historians glean their information on
India? In a provocative recent study, Bosworth has suggested some complicity between indigenous priests and the Macedonians gleaning information

from them. 130 This raises several questions of methodology, and is a helpful

125

126

The codices of Diodorus, e.g., 17.107.1, consistendy refer to him as Kapccvos instead.
Jean Filliozat, ‘La valeur des connaissances gr£co-romaines sur Tinde,Journ. sav. (1965), 97-136, at
109. J. W. de Jong, ‘The discovery of India by the Greeks’, Asiatische Studien 27 (1973), 115-43 at
120.

117

Cf. Pearson, Lost histories, pp. 22-49, on Callisthenes. For Bosworth, ‘Calanus’, the divided literary

representation of Calanus stems from divisions between Brahmans at the time of Megasthenes’ visit
to India.
128

129

YCIS 24 (1975), 147-70 at 159.
Ch. 20.1. Nearchus and Megasthenes, ‘men worthy of credit’, SoKipco av 5 pE (17.6) are together
E. Badian, ‘Nearchus the Cretan’,

the sources for the first, ethnographic section of the work. Note the remarks of
A. Brunt, ‘On historical fragments and epitomes’, CQ 30 (1980), 477-94, at 482, on the dif-

cited as
P.

ficulties of reconstructing Nearchus from Arrian and Strabo, his main repositories.
130

Alexander and the east, 98-132.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

4i

corrective to the tendency of ancient texts to emphasise matters of factual accuracy over those of sources. Bosworth’s inquiry is informed by a
relatively new trend in social anthropology to concentrate on the process

whereby information is assembled — a process characterised by contingencies and problems of translation - rather than the static object of earlier
ethnographic writing 131
.

Tantalisingly, Strabo

mentions in passing that Mandanis is speaking

through the medium of three interpreters (who know, apart from language,

no more than the masses, says Mandanis ). 132 He mentions this to underline

how hard it is for anything he himself says to have an impact, whereas
Alexander would have the power to force people, where necessary, to learn
to exercise self-control ( sophronein ). The matter of interpreters is, however,

not developed in ways that would be interesting to modern ethnographic
studies, with their emphasis on methodology.

Among Strabo’s considerable criticism, ‘flattery’ is a particular point, one
made in connection with Callisthenes particularly. Strabo’s allegations of
flattery resonate with the rhetoric of bigness surrounding the contents of

the description itself. As we have seen above, the idea of abundance, if not
bigness, is present in Herodotus’ India. This is something pre-existing that

the context of Alexander seems to have magnified.
Finally, what role did Aristotle himself play? Only in the eastern tradi-

tion, much of it dating to the later period, is he said to have accompanied

Alexander’s expedition 133 Even if we make allowances for the vagaries of
.

biographical tradition, there are strong indications that Aristotle was the
teacher of the young Alexander: we can therefore infer that he was a major

source of Alexander’s geographical knowledge, and hence of the assumptions informing his strategies.

On the other hand, as we have seen above,

the extant works of Aristotle contain little engagement with geography or

131

Edmund Carpenter, Oh, what a blow that phantom gave me! (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1973), pointed ahead to later studies such as those in Writing culture: the poetics and
politics ofethnography, ed. James Clifford and George E. Marcus (Berkeley: University of California

Press, 1986). For the semiotic approach to the concept of culture, Clifford Geertz, The interpretation

ofcultures, 2nd edn (New York: Basic, 2000), remains seminal well after its original publication in
1973
132

-

15.1.64 C716; cf. B. C. J. Timmer, Megasthenes en de Indische maatschappij (Amsterdam: H. J. Paris,

1930), p. 45; de Jong, ‘Discovery’, 119.
133

Ingemar During, Aristotle in the ancient biographical tradition (Goteborg University Press, 1957);

Max Brocker, Aristoteles als Alexanders Lehrer in der Legende (diss. Bonn 1965). For two attempts
to reconstruct historically the possible involvement of Aristotle, see James S. Romm, ‘Aristotle’s
elephant and the myth of Alexander’s scientific patronage’, AJPhil. no (1989), 566-75, and Bosworth,
‘Aristode’.

42

Creation ofa discourse

.

in fact with India; as a result there is no reason to believe that this is an
issue in which Aristotle influenced him directly. 134

II. 2.

It

Megasthenes and Chandragupta

’s

court

comes as something of a surprise that a writer who is subsequently

accorded greater credibility than others was not part of Alexander’s cam-

paign but visited India in its aftermath. Like Scylax and Ctesias before him,

Megasthenes was attached to a royal court/ 35 in his case to that of Seleucus I
Nicator (c. 358—281 bc). He visited the court of the Maurya emperor Chandragupta, known to the Greeks as Sandrakottos, as an ambassador either of

Seleucus himself or of Sibyrtios, satrap of Arachosia/ 36 This court was based
in Palibothra, known in Sanskrit as Pataliputra, near modern-day Patna/ 37

Megasthenes’ account seems from its fragments to have been the fullest

account of India that the Greco-Roman world ever had/ 38 From the point

of view of ancient Indian history, Megasthenes’ Indography does in fact
appear to offer particularly valuable evidence, especially with regard to elephants and other military matters/ 39 What is important, for our purposes,
was the perception that Megasthenes’ account deserved some credibility by
virtue of its author’s own travels.

Arrian mentions him as an example when speaking of those who took
part in Alexander’s campaign’ (6.1-2). According to the usual chronology,
this

is

an apparent error.

Possibly,

it

reflects

If so,

it

would be interesting to account for.

the intertextual relation between the various Alexan-

der histories by Arrian’s time, in a kind of echo chamber. Or it might be

considered testimony to the power of autopsy, in ways which might even

have pre-empted medieval ideas about Alexander himself as scholar and
explorer. Or it could be that the early loss of the contemporary Alexander

historians gave Megasthenes added significance, faute de mieux. More radically, a recent study would take Arrian at his word, and consequently place

Megasthenes’ journeys as early as 320-318 bc, that is, before Chandragupta’s

power stretched as far as the Indus valley/ 40
134

Bosworth, ‘Aristotle’, 423.

136

On Chandragupta and Sibyrtios see the texts given by Jacoby at T2, esp. Arr. Anab. 5.6.2; cf. Stein,
‘Megasthenes’, RE XV.i (1931) 230—326, at 230-1. Among modern accounts John D. Grainger,

135

Cf Romm, Edges pp. 83-4.
,

Seleukos Nikator: constructing a Hellenistic kingdom (London: Routledge, 1990), p. 154, is particularly
skeptical of Megasthenes.
137

Talbert, Barrington atlas 6 F4.

139

Thomas

R.

138

Bevan, ‘India’, p. 400.

Trautmann, ‘Elephants and the Mauryas’,

in

India:

history

and thought

,

ed.

S. N. Mukherjee (Calcutta: Subarnarekha, 1982), pp. 254-81.
140

A. B. Bosworth, ‘The historical setting of Megasthenes’ Indica',

Cl. Phil. 91 (1996), 113-27: by
Bosworth s dating, Megasthenes belongs to the same world as the Alexander historians, and his visit

to the Mauryan court perhaps as early as 319/318.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

43

If the doxographic problem casts a shadow over this chapter as a whole,

then Megasthenes presents an extreme case. The longest of the fragments
given by Jacoby at no point names Megasthenes as source.

141

Now it is

true that the degree of overlap with similar material in Strabo, Pliny and

Arrian points to a common source, most likely Megasthenes. It is also true
that

Diodorus generally tends not to name his sources, 141 certainly less

frequently than do the other writers. But this is hardly conclusive, and as
things stand the identification of Megasthenes as the direct source is less
secure than Jacoby would lead his readers to believe. 143

Whatever the specifics of this passage and others like it, there is no denying the importance of Megasthenes to the later tradition. Any survey of
the later, Roman-period Indographers makes clear that Megasthenes more

than anyone else tends to be cited as an authority. And what is more, while

he too is liable to criticism, it is he who is most often praised as accurate. 144

The thesis that the reliability of an ancient Indographer is in direct proportion to his dependence on Megasthenes is today easily dismissed as an
editor’s enthusiasm for his author.' 45 It might be said that within the com-

petitive context of an emerging tradition, it is Megasthenes’ text as much
as any that becomes an object of struggle over veracity. Whereas Diodorus,
as

we saw, says little about his sources, Strabo and Pliny are very doxo-

graphic, in that their mode for recounting information about India (and

indeed about other distant places) is couched in the competitive language
of rival authorities, of truth and fiction. For these later writers then, it is
Megasthenes’ Indica that takes on the role of the key text that needs to be

proven or disproven on any given point.' 46

Given the sheer bulk of fragments of Megasthenes and given the ancient
debate around them, we have to pose the question: what are the

critical

features of Megasthenes’ description, and to what extent does it differ from
earlier ones?

One aspect of his Indography, absent in earlier Greek texts, is

the description of an Indian city, namely Palibothra. It is no coincidence
that its founding is ascribed to Herakles (Diodorus 2.39), in view of his role

141

FGrH 715 F4 = Diod. 2.35.1-2.42.4, the contents of which are discussed below.

142

Kenneth S. Sacks, Diodorus Siculus and the first century (Princeton University Press, 1990), argues
for Diodorus’ Bibliotheke to be seen in its own right, as a product of its own times, rather than the

product of a mere copyist.

The text of Megasthenes is reconstructed by Jacoby as FGrH 715.
144
Truesdell S. Brown is one of his most avid modern apologists: see esp. ‘The reliability of Megas143

thenes’, AJPhil. 76 (1955), 18-33.
145

For Brown, ‘Reliability’, Megasthenes deserves credit for rejecting Ctesias’ account and ‘his ability
to give a straightforward account of what he had seen’ - hints of special pleading on Megasthenes’
behalf.

146

See, e.g., Brown, ‘Reliability’, as well as his ‘The merits and weaknesses of Megasthenes’, Phoenix
11 (1957). 12-24.

Creation ofa discourse

44

as a culture hero. 147 Megasthenes thus represents a move beyond the Indus

valley per se, eastward toward the Ganges valley. There is no indication in

the fragments that this was somehow a different region; rather, Palibothra
is

part of the same geographic entity, ‘India’.

Perhaps the most striking feature of Megasthenes’ India is

its

abun-

dance. This means, in Diodorus’ breathless description, a hypertrophe of
the natural realm: animal (e.g., elephants, monkeys and snakes), vegetable
(a double harvest) and mineral (supplies of gold and silver) all occur. It
should be stressed that these are not monsters, in the style of Ctesias, but

more realistic animals that are great in size and number. The excess of its
scale makes Diodorus compare Libya. In size and number, India’s elephants

exceed even Libya’s.' 48 The key to this general principle of plenty, verging

even on beauty, is clearly articulated by Diodorus at an earlier passage:' 49
For India is a land of exceptional beauty, and since it is crossed by many rivers
it is supplied with water over its whole area and produces two harvests each year.
As a result it has such an abundance of the necessities of life that at all times it
blesses its inhabitants with plentiful enjoyment of them. People say that because

of the favorable climate in those parts the country has never endured famine or
the destruction of crops. Also, it has an unbelievable profusion of elephants, which

both in courage and bodily strength far surpass those of Libya, and likewise gold,
silver, iron and copper; further, one can find within its borders great quantities of
precious stones of every kind and of almost all other objects which contribute to
luxury and wealth. (Diodorus 2 .i6.3-4)' 5 °

There is a certain amount of internal comparison too: 151 e.g., Gandaridae
produces the largest elephants (2.37.2) and this is why it was long able to
evade capture. Diodorus claims that it is on account of their consequent
military power that Alexander refrained
147

from attacking the Gandaridae

Among the many celebrations of Heracles as a culture hero, Isocrates’ praise of his psyche (spirit)
noteworthy, especially when it is addressed to Philip in 346 bc ( Oration 5.109-10); cf. G. Karl
Galinsky, The Herakles theme: the adaptations of the hero in literature from Homer to the twentieth
is

century (Totowa: Rowman and Littlefield, 1972), pp. 101-25.
148

F4 = Diod. 2.35.3—4.

149

This passage Jacoby has not specifically attributed to Megasthenes, though it has all the features of

1,0

P yap ’Iv 6 ixf| x“P a Siacfopos oCroa t<o xaAAst xai ttoAAoTs SieiAtipuevti ttotccuoT$ apSEUETal te tToAAaxoO xai Sittous xa9' Exaorov fviatrrov fx<()EpEi xapuous' 616 xai tcov TTp 6 to
$

F4, which he does see as Megasthenes’.

ffiv ettittiSeIwv toctoOtov exei TtAfjOos coote 81 a ttavTOS aj)0ovov aTToAauaiv toTs Eyxcoplois
trapEXEcreai. AcyETai Se ptiSettote xaT'auTqv yEyovtvai aiToSsiav fj tfiOopav xapTttov Sia tiJv

tuxpacriav tcov tottcov. lyu Se xai tcov tAEtfavTcov amtrtov trAfiSos, ot Tats te aAxai$ xai
Tats toO crcbpaTOS pcopais troAu ttpoexoucti tcov iv Trj AipOt] yivopEVcov, opolco; Se xpvcrov,

apyupov, crlSTipov, yaAxov Ttpos Se toutois A10cov TravTolcov xai ttoAuteAcov krriv ev aCnr|
TrAfi0os, eti Se tcov aAAcov aiTavTcov aytSov tcov trpos Tpuc^pv xai ttAoOtov Sioteivovtcov.
151

Such comparisons make it necessary to question Romm’s contrast between Libya and India as
mysteries of internal and external space respectively ( Edges

,

p. 83).

Achaemenid India and Alexander

45

even when he had conquered other Indian tribes: he heard of their 4,000
elephants in military service and of their readiness to withstand his attack
(2.37.3). This

we can dismiss as a misunderstanding on the part of Diodorus

or his sources, given that Alexander never did reach the Ganges. 152 Yet even
this comment is testimony both to the influence of geographical informa-

tion, of news’ as a factor within the military strategy of this campaign; and

military value of elephants. 153 It is indeed with the elephant that we find a
significant overlap of natural history and military interests.

Rivers are another important feature to suggest both scientific and military interests. Certainly, the big rivers bulk large in three of the major texts

preserving Megasthenes’ fragments: Diodorus, Strabo and Arrian. 154 As a

testimony to their scale, the Indian rivers are said to surpass those of Asia,
even if the Danube and Nile were to unite (Arrian, Indica 3.9). Arrian in fact
goes on to discuss, with reference to Megasthenes, the huge proportions of
the Ganges and its tributaries (4.2-16). It is bigger than the Indus. Both of

them far surpass the Nile and Danube in volume, since the latter two have
no tributaries (4.13). This comparison is not only a matter of establishing
what is ‘bigger and better’, but illustrates the principle that has also been
shown in Theophrastus’ botany, also in the wake of Alexander’s expedition:
the known is used to explain the unknown. 155
In keeping with the line of thought expressed in the Hippocratic Airs
waters places we encounter the principle of environmental determinism

involving the inhabitants of India. 156 Just as Indian elephants, living in this

plenteous land, are strong (in fact stronger than Libyan) and well trained
for war, so India’s inhabitants are of unusually large stature. They are skilled
as a result of breathing pure air and drinking fresh water (Diodorus 2.36.1).

We have now seen, in various parts of the natural sphere, a great deal of the
marvellous. How did readers understand this? According to a provocative
recent study, marvels carried the sense of the disturbing and threatening:

by this interpretation, marvels in post-Alexander accounts of India served
as a justification for the failure of the Seleucids to conquer what had by

now become the Mauryan kingdom. 157 This suggestion is attractive, but it
152

Bosworth, Arrian to Alexander, p. 131.

153

Note Bosworth ‘Aristotle’, 413, on Persian elephants (e.g., Curt. 5.2.10). See further Trautmann,
‘Elephants and Mauryas’, and Chapter 4 below.
Diod. 2.37.1-7 = F4; Arr. Ind. 4.2-12 = F9; Strabo 15.1.3$ C702 = F9 also.
155
P. M. Fraser, ‘The world of Theophrastus’, in Greek historiography, ed. Simon Hornblower,

154

pp. 167-92 at 173.
156

Thomas, Herodotus in context, esp. pp. 86-98, explores the complexities of this text in relation to
historical writing; also Benjamin H. Isaac, The invention of racism in classical antiquity (Princeton
University Press, 2004).

157

Sherwin- White and Kuhrt, Samarkhand to Sardis, p. 97.

Creation ofa discourse

46

has weight only if it can be proven that the marvellous carried the sense of
threat, and that seems something of a stretch. 158

Megasthenes gives considerable attention to social stratification, in what
has tended to be described as the caste system. 159 In the longest continu-

ous passages Jacoby attributes to him, Megasthenes discusses the hierarchy

of Indian society. 160 His description of the seven groups begins with the
philosophers, who are first in prominence though smallest in number. They
are exempt from state service, except in so far as they fulfil priestly duties

on behalf of private citizens, including funerals and foretelling the future
that do not seem far from those of a priest of the Roman state. The term in
Diodorus and Strabo usually translated as caste’ is meros, whereas Arrian
61
uses genos
Each writer goes on to describe the other six groups, which are,
in order: farmers; cowherds and shepherds; artisans; the military; inspectors;
and councillors. In each case, as with the philosophers, the description of
the class includes their occupation, their numbers and their relation to the
power of the state.
What are we to make of this careful attention to social structure? On
.'

the one hand, Herodotus speaks of a seven-fold division of Egyptian society,

so perhaps Megasthenes’ comments are a Herodotean projection, not

to be taken seriously.

Herodotus says: ‘There are in Egypt seven classes

(gened), which are called respectively, priests, warriors,

cowherds, swine-

herds, shopkeepers, interpreters, and pilots’ (2.164). These are the classes

of the Egyptians, and their names are given them from their crafts. He
then proceeds to subdivide the warriors into the groups Hermotybies and
Calasiries, according to region (2.165-66).

On the other hand, these pas-

sages have received detailed attention from historians of Indian society, and
158

Gabba’s article, ‘True history’, and the substantial new discussion of paradoxography by Guido
Schepens and Kris Delcroix, ‘Ancient paradoxography: origin, evolution, production and reception’,
in La letteratura di consumo nel mondo Greco-latino, ed.

Oronzo Pecere and Antonio Stramaglia

(Cassino: Universiti degli Studi di Cassino, 1996), pp. 373-460, have much more to say about
credibility than about any possible fear that might be engendered. Nor is fear prominent in Caroline

W. Bynum’s compelling discussion of marvel in the western Middle Ages: ‘Wonder’,/!///? 102 (1997),
1-26.
159

Given the controversy over the term and concept of caste in modern Indian historiography, it
would seem incautious to talk about caste in the period under discussion. At one extreme, Nicholas
B. Dirks has argued for discontinuity between precolonial and cplonial notions of caste: Castes
of mind: colonialism and the making of modem India (Princeton University Press, 2001). Certainly
Megasthenes’ discussion has received censure from Bernard S. Cohn, ‘Notes on the history of the
study of Indian society and culture’, in his An anthropologist among the historians and other essays
(Oxford University Press, 1987), pp. 136-71, at 138-9; see also Donald F. Lach, Asia in the making

160

ofEurope (University of Chicago Press, 1965), vol. I, p. 10.
F4 = Diod. 2.40.1—2.41.4, which overlaps considerably with the lengthy F19 = Arr. Ind. 11 and
Strabo 15.1.39-49 C703-7 (interrupted).

161

Cf. Diod. 2.40.6 (j) 0 Aov.

.

Achaemenid India and Alexander
especially of Indian law.

161

47

Megasthenes’ account has often been compared

on particular points with an Indian treatise on statecraft, the Arthasastra.

However, the comparison is a difficult one since this text, traditionis most likely a later

ally linked with Chandraguptas minister Chanakya,

creation.

163

What makes Megasthenes’ account stand out from others, as best we
164

can reconstruct them, are his statements concerning India’s antiquity.
Again, the main source is Diodorus’ rich but troublesome passage (2.38for the
39 = F4). The stories about Dionysus and Heracles are important

time-depth they confer on India. They are presented as civilizing divinities,

who come to a nomadic people and bestow on them the accoutrements of
culture.

165

Diodorus seldom names his sources, but in this case he twice
men, thereby implying a certain

attributes these stories to Indian wise
critical

distance (2.38.3, cf. 2.39.1). Like the issue of the antiquity of the

Jews relative to that of the Egyptians, it is contentious: Arrian, for one,
66
dismisses it as a Macedonian boast, but not without recounting it first.'
Needless to say, many issues are at stake when origins are perceived across
cultural boundaries.

167

Given the Greek identities of the two divinities,

this may be taken as an assertion of Greek cultural priority. At the same

time, qua charter myth, this is a way of accounting for Hellenism in the far
eastern corner of the inhabited world. Given what we know from epigraphy,

and especially the well-known bilingual edicts of Ashoka with their finely
168
it is remarkable that there are so few literary
carved Greek and Aramaic,

162

See esp. Bernhard Breloer, Kautaliya-Studien, 2 vols. (Bonn: Schroeder, 1927—8); O. Stein, RE-,

Timmer, Megasthenes en de Indische and Allan Dahlquist, Megasthenes and Indian religion: a study
in motives and types (Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1962).
Detailed textual analysis shows that the work is the product of multiple authors, compiled perhaps as
late as the mid-second century ad: Thomas R. Trautmann, Kautilya and the Arthasastra: a statistical
;

163

investigation of the authorship and evolution of the text (Leiden: Brill, 1971). Hardly contemporary

with Chandragupta, it nonetheless claims continuity with that period, though in a normative
rather than descriptive fashion: Romila Thapar, Early India: from the origins to ad 1300 (Berkeley:

University of California Press, 2002), pp. 184-6.
164

On the particularity of this in ancient ethnography see, e.g., Karl Trudinger, Studien zur Geschichte
der griechisch-romischen Ethnographie (Basel: Birkhauser, 1911), p. 75.

165

On nomadism as an ethnographic trope see Brent D. Shaw, ‘“Eaters of flesh and drinkers of milk

:

the Mediterranean ideology of the pastoral nomad’, Anc. Soc 13—14 (1982—3), 5—31; Hartog, Mirror

of Herodotus.
166

Ind. 5.10; cf. 5. 3. 1-4, where he takes issue with Eratosthenes.

167

E. J. Bickerman’s essay, ‘Origines gentium’, Cl. Phil. 47 (1952), 65-81, remains an important articulation of this principle; cf. Time: histories and ethnographies ed. Diane Owen Hughes and Thomas
,

R. Trautmann (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995).
168

First

published by Daniel Schlumberger et al.

,

‘Une bilingue gr£co-arameene d’Asoka’, Journal

Asiatique 246 (1958), 1—48; cf. Sherwin-White and Kuhrt, Samarkhand to Sardis pp. 100—3, and
,

Thapar, Asoka and the decline of the Mauryas, rev. edn (Oxford University Press, 1997).

Creation ofa discourse

48

references to the diffusion of Greek culture. This must count as a major

absence from the literary tradition discussed here.

Apart from this, there does not appear to be any significant indication
of the passage of time in Greek Indography. Significantly, most of the verbs
used in the fragments quoted are in the present tense, what has been called
the ethnographic present. 169 Just how typical of ethnographic writing is
this account of early Indian history? To be sure, Greeks had a very definite
notion of the antiquity of Near Eastern civilisations, particularly those with

traditions of writing much older than their own, for example Babylonians,

Egyptians and Jews. 170 But it is not clear to what extent Indians were thought
to share the same features as these other ancient, learned societies of the
east, and it deserves to be noted that

we have not encountered any Greek

ideas about Indian writing: these questions will have to be discussed below

in relation to ethnographic traditions generally (Chapter 2

wisdom

specifically (Chapter 6).

)

and to ‘alien

For the present, it is sufficient to note

that the notion of Indian antiquity is a highly qualified one, contingent

even on the antiquity of the Greeks themselves. Even if it was not a fiction

of Alexander’s own propaganda to the degree Bosworth has claimed, then
it

certainly does imply the cultural priority of Greeks, and, as such, seems

like an invented tradition par excellence. 171

II.3. Bactrians and ‘Indo-Greeks’

From a Greek point of view, South Asia did at one point constitute an
empire in its own right, in the sense of governance, albeit for only a brief
period. It is necessary here to shift the focus away from the military aspect of

Alexander’s expedition, to consider instead what effect that expedition had

169

If we stress the Greek context of this supposed Indian history, we might, with an important scholar
of modern anthropology, see it as a case of the following phenomenon: ‘Whenever marginal peoples

come into a historical or ethnographic space that has been defined by the Western imagination’ their

own histories are quickly lost. Thus James Clifford, The predicament of culture: twentieth-century
ethnography, literature and art (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988),
p. 5; cf. Cohn,
Anthropologist. But if we are to view ancient ethnographic modes in their own right, a passage such
as this could be argued in opposite directions: on the one it is an ethnographic history, and a rarity
as such;

on the other hand it is a limited one, and one which is predicated on the idea of Greek

cultural priority. See further Chapter z, section II. z below.
170

Note for example F3 Clement of Alexandria (Strom. 1.72.4) who, asserting that wisdom begins
with particular ‘barbarian’ peoples by virtue of their antiquity, compares the status of Brahmans
relative to Indian society with that of the Jews relative to Syrian. Herodotus’ emphasis on Egyptian

antiquity forms a tacit contrast with forward-looking Greek temporalities: Vasunia,

Gift ofthe Nile,

pp. 110-35.
171

To use the resonant term of E. J. Hobsbawm, in his introduction to The invention of tradition
ed. Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger (Cambridge University Press, 1983).

.

>

Achaemenid India and Alexander

49

on the lands it traversed. This raises questions about the diffusion of Greek
culture and language. Here we are on less firm ground, both in relation
to the material at hand and to the concepts implicit in the scholarship
on the subject. In assessing the ‘Indo-Greek or Greco-Bactrian empire
there exist few literary sources but many coins.
are

172

The phenomenon we

examining is the establishment in the third and second centuries of
its power in Greek

a Central Asian empire whose leadership expressed

terms, and made use of the Greek language. If these comments sound like
a minimalist definition with which to approach the topic, they are thus

conceived as a conscious antidote to the highly reified notion of Hellenism
that characterises the Alexander biographies by Droysen and Tarn, in which
173
Contrary to the
an almost missionary aspect of Greek culture is evident.
anachronisms and exaggerations of these studies, not entirely expunged

from more recent accounts, it is best for us here to take a minimalist
74
approach, and in fact the current context requires no more than that.'
The settlement of Greco-Macedonian soldiers in Bactria and Sogdiana,

and intermarriage with east Iranian people, brought about a Central Asian
centre in which the elite inhabitants expressed themselves in terms of Greek
culture. Certainly Strabo stresses the Greekness of its rulers (15.1.3 C686).

175

A passage in Trogus-Justin implies that their sovereignty stretched well into
the Ganges valley (41.1.8).

This has made little impact on literary texts, but archaeological work
has produced some spectacular and unexpected results. Foremost among
them were the discoveries at Ai Khanum at the confluence of the Oxus

(Amu Darya) and the Kowkcheh.
inscriptions

176

The palace, theatre, gymnasium and

found there all testify to some degree of Greek presence,

177

even if domestic architecture does not tell anything like so dramatic a story.
In general, coins have played a major part in the recovery of this history
171

Frank L. Holt, Thundering Zeus: the making of Hellenistic Bactria (Berkeley: University of

E.g.,

California Press, 1999)* PP- 1 74_ 84

-

^* Hartog,
Peter Green, Alexander to Actium (Berkeley: University of California Press, 199°) P- 3 I2 c
Memories of Odysseus, pp. 158—60; and Arnaldo Momigliano, J. G. Droysen between Greeks and
° _2 3
[i
Jews’, in his Essays in ancient and modern historiography (Oxford: Blackwell, 1977 97 °])> PP- 3 7
vol.
174
For recent synthetic histories, see Domenico Musti, ‘Syria and the East in CAH, 2nd edn,
of central Asia’,
VII. (1984) pp. 175-220, esp. 210-16, and Paul Bernard, ‘The Greek kingdoms
1

73

>

>

-

,

1

(Paris: UNESCO, 1994)
in History of civilizations of Central Asia, vol. II, ed. Janos Harmatta

r

75

PP- 99-DOFurther references are given by Stanley M. Burstein, The Hellenistic age (Cambridge University
Press, 1985), p. 71.

176

Khanoum

See further Musti, ‘Syria’, p. 214 n. 67; for an archaeologist’s account, Paul Bernard, ‘Ai
1
en Afghanistan hier (1964-1978) et aujourd’hui (2001): un site en p£ril. Perspectives d’avenir’, CRA
(2001), 971-1029.

177

On

below.
the inscription linked with Clearchus of Soli, compare also Chapter 6, section II.3

.

5°

Creation ofa discourse

(in so far as

it

can be recovered). The recurrence of Heracles in artifacts

from here is merely one reminder of the importance of Alexander to the
self-presentation of the Indo-Greek rulers.

With the rise of the Greco-Bactrian empire in mid-third century, the
Indus valley became separated, in the political sphere at least, from Seleucid
control. Antiochus III did indeed reach the outer reaches of the

valley at

a later point, but his expedition failed to reconquer the area in

for the Seleucids. 178

It was

any sense
around the start of the second century, when

Demetrius I and then Menander conquered parts of the valley, i.e.
northwest India, that the Greco-Bactrians themselves reached the height
of
their power. A number of small states sprang up in this vicinity,
each of them
having some link with Greek language and customs, but they were later
first

to be absorbed by nomadic groups of Parthians, Sacae and
Indoscythians
from further east.

Two shadowy but intriguing figures deserve some mention here.
Demetrius I ( c 200—185 BC ) of Bactria annexed Arachosia and Drangiana to
his kingdom. There is some debate over whether coins supposedly

issued

by him were not rather issued by a later Demetrius contemporary with
Eucratides I. His silver coins show him wearing an elephant cap on
the
obverse, with Heracles standing on the reverse.

But it was

Menander, known in Indian sources as Milinda (ruled c. 155—
130 bc) who was probably the greatest of the Indo-Greek kings. According
to Indian tradition he led an expedition to Pataliputra in the

Ganges valley

but returned without having annexed anything; he embraced Buddhism
following a conversation with the Buddhist scholar-priest Nagasena. Surviving coins issued by him present him as a Hellenistic king on the

obverse,

with Athena of Pella on the reverse, complete with the Greek inscription,

‘Menander the Saviour king’. 179 This Menander has been identified with
the Pali work, ‘The questions of King Milinda’, which has been
dated to
around 150— 100 bc. iSo The rise of the Parthian empire interrupted con-

between these Indo-Greeks and the (rest of the) Greek world, till
they were blotted out or absorbed by invaders from Central Asia around
tact

17

On Antiochus Ill's campaigns against the Bactrians under Euthydemus, narrated in Polybius 11.39,
see A. K. Narain,

The Greeks of Bactria and India’, CAH, 2nd edn (1989), vol. VIII.2, pp. 388-421

at 397-8.
179

Green, Alexander to Actium, pp. 320-2 (see fig. 104 for the silver tetradrachm);

George Woodcock,
The Greeks in India (London: Faber, 1966), ch. 6 Among older works, Tarn, The
.

and India, and A. K. Narain, The Indo-Greeks (Oxford: Clarendon,

Greeks in Bactria

1957), remain important, but

require caution.
180 -p

w Rhys Davids

(tr.),

The questions ofKing Milinda, 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon, 1890-4).

,

Achaemenid India and Alexander

51

80-30 bc. At all events, there is no evidence of this group after this period of
invasion.

One fascinating area of evidence concerns ‘Gandharan’ art, which we
might define as Hellenistic-Buddhist style of the western Indus Valley and
Central Asia. It is widely agreed that Alexander’s invasion was followed

by a radical change in northwest Indian artistic styles.

181

Sculptures of the

Bodhisatva, representing the young Gautama or alternatively any young
man on the way to salvation, show strong features of Greek art, notably
the series of folds in the garment worn, and the less-rounded presentation
of the face. This is a classic instance in which material evidence encourages

speculation about cultural identity. On the one hand it provides inviting
18on the other hand,
source material for the study of cultural interaction;
it leaves us at

the level of speculation, given that the literary sources do little

to round out the historical picture. In a word, then, the Indo-Greeks are a
problem of indeterminate proportions for this study; hard as it is to know

about them historically, it is even harder to detect any impact they might
have had on the Greco-Roman ethnographic imagination.

II. 4.

Mapping India: from the bematists to Eratosthenes

In the case of both Hecataeus and Herodotus we have seen how India was

used to conceive the oikoumene on a large scale. This is what we have called
the ‘cosmological India’ of Greek thought. To these writers may be added
the historian Ephorus (c. 405 and 330 bc), who was deeply interested in geographic questions and appears to have devised a novel cartographic system.

India was one of the peripheral areas he incorporated into his conception
of the inhabited world: by this view, according to Strabo (1.2.28 C34), the

Indians occupied one of the world’s four parts, the others being inhabited
by Ethiopians, Celts and Scythians. These people represent the east, south,
83
west and north respectively, defined by the direction of the winds.' This
line of thought is visible also in Aristotle’s system of winds, as described in

181

symbol in
Elizabeth Errington et at. (eds.), The crossroads of Asia: transformations in image and
ancient Afghanistan and Pakistan (Cambridge: Cambridge India and Iran Trust, 1992).
the art

of

offers

John Boardman, The diffusion of classical art in antiquity (Princeton University Press, 1994),
important analysis but grounds for caution emerge in the following note and in the introduction
to Chapter 3 below.
182

For an assessment of colonial contexts and other methodological issues (regarding Vincent

Smith,

Aurel Stein and others), see Stanley K. Abe, ‘Inside the wonder house: Buddhist art and the west
the Buddha: the study of Buddhism under colonialism (University of Chicago Press,
in Curators

of

1995 ). PP- 63-106.
l8

’

Harley and Woodward, ‘Foundations’, in History of Cartography, pp. 143-4-

Creation ofa discourse

52

his Meteorologica 2. 6. Some decades later Timosthenes of Rhodes (fl. 270 bc)

refined the system of wind directions in a way that foreshadowed the mod-

ern compass points. According to Agathemerus ( Geographiae informatio
2.7)

>

Timosthenes explicitly identified the twelve winds with distant peo-

ples or places: India is linked with the

Eurus wind, being placed in the

east-southeast, between the Apeliotes (linked with Bactriana) and Euronotus (the Red Sea and Ethiopia).

But this cosmological sense of India is merely one aspect of cartographic
developments: the other concerns measuring, and it is here that Alexander’s
expedition played a major and concrete part. We have already seen that the

campaign included a number of scholars. The bematists (measurers’) made

up one group whose specialised skills were part of the campaign. Their task
was to measure the distances between points of rest, and to describe natural
features of the lands they traversed. Only two of these writers are known

by name, Diognetus and Baiton, and nothing survives intact from their
1® 4

They wrote monographs called stathmoi (stages’), which went
beyond mere lists of places to have a literary frame. These were mentioned
and used by later writers, including notably Pliny (6.61-62); most of the
accounts.

fragments linked with their names concern distances between parts of the
area covered by Alexander’s campaign.

Though the reports of the bematists were, inevitably, subjected to criticisms of exaggeration, they did provide a basis for the subsequent work
of Eratosthenes, polymath librarian of Alexandria ( c 234-196 bc). 1 ® 5 If
Eratosthenes is today considered the most important geographer of the
.

Hellenistic age - both for his measuring of the circumference of the earth

and for constructing a world map on a grid of meridians and latitudes the first of these bears indirectly on India and the second directly. It was on
a north-south axis that Eratosthenes calculated the earth’s circumference,

using Alexandria and Syene (Aswan) as his points of measurement. 1 ® 6 The
assumption that the earth is spherical made it possible to convert the angles,

measured by an instrument called the gnomon, into stades, and ultimately
to map the entire inhabited world (oikoumene)

.

He calculated the distance

from the farthest points of India to those of Iberia at around 74,000 stades,
184

For the texts, see FGrH 119-122. For the authors, see Flelmut Berve, Das Alexanderreich aufprosopographischer Grundlage (Munich: Beck, 1926), vol. II, nos. 198, 800: Fraser, Cities
ofAlexander,
pp. 75-80.

5

Fraser, Cities ofAlexander, pp. 80—2; now Klaus Geus, Eratosthenes von Kyrene. Studien zur hellenis-

186

On Alexandria as a ‘centre of calculation’, see Roy MacLeod, ‘Introduction: Alexandria in history

tischen Kultur- und Wissenschaftsgeschichte (Munich: Beck, 2002),

and myth

pp. 231 and 236.

in Roy MacLeod (ed.), The Library ofAlexandria: centre oflearning in the ancient world
(London: Tauris, 2000), pp. 1-15, at 3.
,

)

Achaemenid India and Alexander

53

but then, relying on the accepted knowledge that the length of the oikoumene was more than double its breadth, added a further 2,000 stades to
both east and west to reach an adjusted total of 78,000. This distance was

measured at the latitude of Athens:
if the
sail

enormity of the Atlantic Ocean did not prevent it, we would be able to

from Iberia to India along the very same parallel over the remainder of the
aforementioned disis, the remainder once you have subtracted the

circle, that

tance, which is more than a third of the entire circle. (Eratosthenes in Strabo 1.4.6

C64-65) 187

This scheme, with its effective omission of the Americas, would ultimately
influence geographic knowledge at the time of Columbus voyages.
Again, India is a useful point at which to mark the farthest extent of
the earth, just as Iberia marks the farthest point on the other side of the
east—west axis running through Athens. According to the passage in Strabo

which is the basis of our knowledge of his work, Eratosthenes included a
number of distances, both north-south and east-west, all of them rounded
off to the thousands: these include the distance between the far eastern
capes and eastern India (3,000 stades), between eastern India and the river
Indus (16,000), and between the Indus and the Caspian gates (14,000). The

purpose of these distances was to allow the reader to draw his own map; to
this end, ‘seals’ sphragides or irregular geometric shapes by which the map
(.

of the world could be put together, in the manner of a jigsaw puzzle. India

was represented by a diamond-shaped quadrilateral, simpler and therefore

more conceptually useful shape than that of other countries. The fact that
India was now, in Eratosthenes scheme, firmly and clearly mapped made
in a westerly direction.
it possible to visualise space from the farthest east
This alone is of enormous significance to our topic. Whereas so much
of ancient Greek mapping can be understood on the model of centre of
periphery, Eratosthenes’ worldwide grid offers a theory which allows any
part of the inhabited world to be represented in its own right, with its own
co-ordinates. This is a more decentred model than, say, those of Hecataeus

or Herodotus, and something taken further by Strabo and especially

Ptolemy. 189

ipripicxs eis

coqt’ ei pfi to [iEyeOos toO AtAocvtikoO TTEAayous ekcoAue, kcxv ttAeiv T|pa:s ek tt^s
uiTEp to
tt]v ’lv5iKf|v 61a toO auToO TrapaAAr]Aou, to Aoittov pspos irapa to Aex®£v 5 idcrrr)pa
188

T piTOV pEpOS o] V toO 6 A 0U KUKAoUT
David Woodward, ‘Medieval Mappaemundi\ in History ofcartography, ed. Harley and Woodward,
with reference to intermediary medieval figures, including Roger Bacon and Pierre
vol. I,
pp. 353 —4,

d’Ailly; cf. Geus, Eratosthenes pp. 270-1.
,

189

On Eratosthenes see esp. Geus, Eratosthenes pp. 260-88.
,

Creation ofa discourse

54

III.

ORIGINS AND PROCESS IN THE MAKING OF ROMAN INDIA

From the material surveyed here, a number of features may be brought
out by way of concluding this chapter, and at the same time by way of
introducing the rest of this book. Much here remains uncertain, and there
are question marks over the sources used by many of these writers and
even over the original form of their work. The doxographic problem has

been a major issue throughout this chapter, but it is a problem we shall in
subsequent chapters turn to our advantage when we come to examine the
later contexts of reference in their

own right. What is, however, both certain

and obvious is something that deserves to be mentioned here: a sense of
India’s radical otherness, one which goes hand in hand with a sense of India’s

sheer distance from the Mediterranean world. The Flippocratic Airs waters
places , to take an example of an important text of early Greek ethnography,

covers a geographical span which is not restricted to, but certainly centred

on the eastern Mediterranean world. India is not mentioned there, and is
in fact considerably to the east of the easternmost area mentioned, that

of the Scythians. In this text it is therefore not conceived as an area that
an ordinary Greek, and specifically a Greek doctor, might expect to visit.
In this sense India is not part of the geographic consciousness reflected in

Greek ethnography, certainly up to Alexander: it is ‘off the map’.

But India in ancient maps is an issue that deserves consideration in its

own right. Broadly speaking, the period discussed is one in which India
emerges from its conflation with Aethiopia to become a definite object
in its own right. In a sense this development would never be completed,
given the degree to which features of ‘India’ and ‘Aethiopia’ continued to

be exchanged well into the Roman imperial and medieval periods 190 By
the same token, one might speak of the movement from the cosmologi.

cal conception of India in Hecataeus and Herodotus, with their emphasis

on the shape of the world, to the topographic concerns of the Alexander
historians, with their greater specificity of place and the concern for mea-

suring that comes in their wake in Eratosthenes, for one. There is some
value to this overall characterisation of change, yet Hecataeus’ Periegesis
certainly contained many toponyms; and later scholars such as Aristotle

and Timosthenes undoubtedly still used India to construct their cosmos,
for example the wind directions 191 And it is not least for these reasons that
.

190
191

Schneider, L’Ethiopie et Linde.

Harley and Woodward, ‘Foundations’, in History of cartography, 144-6 and 152-3; Schneider,

L ’Ethiope et L 'Inde.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

55

the Whiggish idea of history-as-progress must be avoided: rather this story
should be seen as one of ever-changing contexts, of continual reinvention
for ever-changing needs and circumstances of contact. Yet, it is true that

a process of distinguishing India and Aethiopia does begin to develop in
this period, if one distinguishes the Homeric and Aeschylean references

with those in Scylax, Hecataeus and certainly Herodotus. From the time it
becomes an entity in itself India is essentially the Indus valley, today’s Pakistani provinces of Panjab and Sindh, the land of rivers. The few references

to the Ganges Valley, including Palibothra in Megasthenes,

is

essentially

an extension of this area. None of the writers described makes any reference to the southern Indian peninsula, and indeed is something we do not
encounter until the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea in the mid-first century
ad. The period surveyed here reveals a gradual refinement of the idea that
India is the edge of the earth: one early step in this direction comes with
Herodotus’ idea that there is a desert to its east, and is thus the farthest part

of the inhabited world. As a way to characterise these changes, it is useful to
invoke the distinction between space and place made in recent cartographic
studies: on this model, it is space that humans encounter, and place that is

created mentally, specifically in the process of naming

192
.

What we see in

this chapter are the very beginnings of the creation of place:

on balance,

there is much more about the exotic, generalised space of India than about
specific, articulated places within it. As plentiful as the Alexander histories

are in describing Alexander’s campaign in the Indus Valley, they tell us
relatively little about the details of Indian topography: there are areas, to be

sure, usually defined by their inhabitants (e.g., ‘the Malli’), and there are
rivers. But even by the time of Megasthenes

we can speak of only two urban

centres, namely Taxila and Pataliputra, that had acquired the specificity of

names within Greek thinking.
The Achaemenid empire has emerged in this survey as both a generator of and a vehicle for Indography, and may thus be seen as a key factor in the development of a more specific Greek notion of India. From
Herodotus onward, a Persian concern with

can be

India’s gold-supply

detected in Greek accounts, a feature that is easily understood in terms
of Darius’ conception of his empire as expressed in the Persepolis inscription (DPh). Throughout the Achaemenid period there were Indians living
in the Iranian-Mesopotamian area, in close proximity to Greeks

192

The

193
.

Raymond Craib, ‘Cartography and power in the conquest and creation of New Spain

,

Latin

American Research Review 35.1 (2000), 7-36, at 16; still seminal is Yi-Fu Tuan, Space and place: the
perspective of experience (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1977), e.g. pp. 199-200.
193

Dihle, ‘Arabien und Indien’, p. 51.

5

6

Creation ofa discourse

presence of Indian troops in Xerxes’ catalogue presented just one case in

which Greeks might have met Indians outside of the Indus Valley itself
(Herodotus 7.65, 70, 86). The possibility that some Indians, including
those captured at Plataea, may have been present in Athens as slaves is a
real one, however speculative it must remain in the absence of evidence to

that effect. 194 This is entirely an argument from historical probability. In
all

these ways it is necessary to read between the lines of Greek accounts,

in order to locate Greek responses to Indian people, animals and objects

outside of the Indus Valley itself. This possibility is one way in which the

seemingly monolithic concept of autopsy may be questioned.

The Persians thus emerge as a key to Greek Indography: long before the
use of the monsoon route from the Mediterranean to India, much travelling was done overland, and thus perforce via the Achaemenid empire.

However, Persian knowledge of India in its own right is hard to reconstruct, in the absence of a tradition of narrative historical writing, at least in

the Greek sense. 19s In this respect, Alexanders campaign did have a major,

long-term impact, in that now Persian knowledge could be more freely circulated. Later, when sea-routes allowed more direct access to India from the

Mediterranean, this Achaemenid framework remained, for by then Indography had already crystallised as a canon of information, largely resistant
to new additions.

From the earliest Greek account we can reconstruct, marvel emerges as
a key theme. This it was to remain,

more or less, throughout antiquity,
and well beyond. When Herodotus plays down the marvellous aspect and
emphasises social groupings instead, that is more the exception than the
rule, and should be seen as part of Herodotus’ own ethnographic interests.

Yet even Herodotus, who says virtually nothing about fantastic creatures in
his comments on India, uses an ethnographic framework similar to that he

uses to describe the Egyptians, one focused on thomasia. Even the death of
Calanus on the funeral pyre is described by Diodorus as a marvel. 196

Whatever its origins, the marvel goes far back in the history of Greek
literature.

Of the period here covered, it is the Hellenistic age which saw

a profusion of both marvellous creatures generally and the metamorphosis
in particular.

When marvel writing comes to have life of its own, most

obviously with the pseudo-Aristotelian text On wonderful things heard (De
mirabilibus auscultationibus), ‘India’ is a venue par excellence for strange
194

Milns, ‘Greek writers’, 356.

195

Momigliano, Alien wisdom

196

TO 8e TrAfjQoS KCCTT) VTT| 0"£ V ETTl TTjV TTapdSo^OV 0 EOCV (17.IO7.4).

p. 126: ‘Perhaps the three elements of Persian education - to ride a
,
horse, to shoot straight and to tell the truth — were not favourable to the formation of a historian.’

Achaemenid India and Alexander

57

occurrences. If we examine that text we see that by far the majority of
its marvels are located on the fringes of the world, a feature that helps
explain the conflation of features between India and Ethiopia. Tellingly, one
passage mentioning India presents it as a source of wealth for the Persian

empire:

They say that among the Indians the copper is so bright, pure, and rust-free that in
colour it cannot be distinguished from gold; further, that among Darius’ drinking
vessels there are certain goblets, many in number, of which one could not decide
other than by smell whether they are copper or gold. (ch. 49

= 834ai~5) 197

The explosion in the Hellenistic period in the amount of information
circulated about India may be seen as part of Greek responses to a rapidly
expanded world. It is in this sense that we can talk about the ‘shock of
discovery’ with the conquests of Alexander and their immediate aftermath
in the eastern Hellenistic world. It is in such circumstances that canonical

and ideas are placed under new pressure, in this case Herodotus’
198
This is also a period which sees special
developments in prose writing, both in historiography and more so in the
romance: now the usual intellectual methods are rejected, and such genres

texts

Histories more than any other

.

as the novel, paradoxography and the fable all follow different approaches to

reality

199

.

The case of India is indicative of new developments: its distinctive

features can be traced to an earlier period of Greek culture, yet it is in the

Hellenistic period itself that they come together with a new intensity. In
particular, Megasthenes is the key figure in an account that leads ultimately

towards Roman perceptions: many of the elements of his Indography can
be seen in earlier versions, but his text becomes a focus of Greek and even
later

Roman Indography. It is Megasthenes that answers Roman needs for

an ‘author function’, a figure of authority, even if that figure turned out to
be highly contested

200
.

Together with marvel emerges the discourse about truth and fiction,
and here it is as well to remember that we are talking about the origins of
197

CDaai 5e Kai ev ’IvSoTs tov x^Akov outgos eTvou Aapirpov Kai KaOapov Kai avicoTov, &ctte pfj
U(7 ® V oAA’ ev toTs Aapslou TTOTpplois (3crriaKas £lvai
SiayivcocjKecjQai Trj xpd*? Trpds tov

XP

198

»

Tivas Kai ttAeious, as el [xr\ Trj oaprj, aAAcos ouk fjv 6iayvcbvai TroTEpov eicti xoAkoi fj \p\Jocd.
Oswyn Murray, ‘Herodotus and hellenistic culture’, CQ22 (1972), 200-13; in a New World context
J.

H. Elliott, The Old world and the new, 1492-1650 (Cambridge University Press, 1970) and Anthony

Grafton, New worlds, ancient texts: the power oftradition and the shock ofdiscovery (Harvard: Belknap,
1992).
199

Gabba, ‘True history’, 55. In terms that now seem somewhat exaggerated, E. R. Dodds, The Greeks

and the irrational (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1951), pp. 236— 69, has presented the
third century bc in terms of a contest between reason and unreason.
100

Term from Michel Foucault, ‘What is an author?’ in Modern criticism and theory ed. David Lodge
(London: Longman, 1988), pp. 197-210, at 202.
,

Creation ofa discourse

58

historical writing, and perhaps also the origins of the novel

201
.

The question

of veracity emerges from the very earliest Greek account of India: Ctesias
is a

key figure here, a kind of ‘fall guy’ in the self-conscious construction of

this discourse on the part of historians and other writers. In other words,

the rejection of Ctesias allowed Megasthenes to be accepted as a source 202
.

It is

no accident that the fourth century has been identified as the ‘first

real heyday of the forger and the critic ’.

203

And it is no accident that the

wonders of India emerged as a ‘package deal’ that includes the rhetoric
about size and distance, and about truth and lies. This may be regarded as
a function of the unfamiliarity of the edges of the earth. From the archaic

period of Greek literature this was identified with fabulous creatures such
as Arimaspians. Whether this shares
is

common roots with Indian mythology

unclear, but at the very least it is clear that an archaic Greek tendency to

map out the edges of the earth by ‘identifying them with strange creatures,
a way of filling cultural space, was reinforced by Indian mythology about

marvellous beings. The importance of such creatures lies not in the question

of what exactly they were or from what origins they came, but the fact that
they marked the edges of the earth ’. 204
Is it happenstance

that so many of the early Indographic texts are pre-

served as fragments? I would suggest not, if we bear in mind their marvellous quality described above. To be sure, modern theorists have shown
that ethnographic information on any given groups of people tends to be

conveyed in fragments, and is never complete 205 As marvel texts go, On
.

wonderful things heard is a prime example: the fact that it was composed
in layers serves to remind us of the ways in which marvels can be added
to and removed from texts. In most cases marvel texts tend to get broken

up into pieces, and are infinitely extendable. (In its surviving form, it thus
represents the reverse of the usual process.) Recognition of this fact puts

fragments firmly on the agenda for the pages that follow: information is

put together and divided up by a variety of forces and processes over the
passage of time. The task of later chapters, in part, will be to identify and
analyse some moments within those processes.

Concretely, there is no denying the significance of Alexander’s expedition
to the acquisition of knowledge. At the same time, we must recognise that it
201

On the ultimate fruitlessness of trying to contemplate the origins of the novel, the warnings of Ewen
L. Bowie and Stephen J. Harrison are well taken: ‘The romance of the novel \JRS 83 (1993), 159-78,
at 173. Nonetheless, nobody would deny that a concern with veracity is shared by the historical and

romance genres.
202
203

See especially Arrian, Ind. 3.6 (= FGrH 715 F6b = FGrH 688 F49).
Anthony Grafton, Forgers and critics: creativity and duplicity in western scholarship (Princeton University Press, 1990), p. 10.

204

Dihle, ‘Arabien und Indien’, 56; cf. Romm, Edges.

205

Particularly Clifford, Predicament.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

59

was overstated in retrospect. Alexander’s own legendary status played some
206
From this chapter
part in this exaggeration, indeed from his own time
we can conclude that one reason why Alexander’s role was exaggerated
.

simply that it did provide an historical figure with whom to link now
2°7
increased interest in and knowledge of India, if not a founder (ktistes)

is

,

While this is not stated explicitly, it may be inferred from the fact that
most of the post-Alexander references to India here discussed tend to be in
a context of the campaign and its aftermath. As we have seen, this is a role

Alexander somewhat surprisingly shares with Megasthenes. On the other
hand, any more systematic modern attempt at historical reconstruction

must recognise that there were continuities before and after Alexander. Is
it merely an optical illusion, or at most a difference of quantity? It does
seem an overstatement to claim that it was with Alexander that the western
world begins to acquire genuine knowledge of the real marvels of the land
of the Indus’; indeed there is a contradiction implicit in the phrase ‘genuine
’.

208

knowledge of the real marvels
These continuities stem in part from a certain intransigence in the estab209
Indeed, the surviving Alexander hislishment of geographic knowledge
.

tories show that new geographical information was slow to be absorbed

210
:

the more ancient writers emphasised Alexander’s expedition as an ethno-

graphic moment, the less likely they were to adopt information subse-

quently acquired.
In retrospect it is easy to overestimate the part played by Alexander.

This may be due in part to the later image of Alexander as a scholar, an

image not in the Alexander histories but in the Romance tradition and
211
But in reality, knowledge was slow to
later developed in medieval times
.

filter through,

and slow to have any marked effect. Alexander’s campaign

will certainly have had a big effect on Greek access to knowledge about

India, but that may have been more indirectly than directly. In cartography,

206

Among many references to flattery ( kolakeia of Alexander, e.g., Aeschin. In Ctes. 162; Agathacides
Mar. Eryth. 21; Callisthenes in FGrH 124 Fi4a 14 = Strabo 17. 1.43; Aelian 6.25; Arr. Anab. 4.8.3-45
)

1.

207

Josephus 5/7.1.470; [Longinus] Subl. 32.2.
Due in part to the urban foundations of Alexander and his successors, the Hellenistic authors
showed considerable interest in the founding of cities: P. M. Fraser, Ptolemaic Alexandria 3 vols.
,

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1972), vol. I, pp. 513-14 and pp. 775-6, with further references; more recently

DNPs.v. ‘Ktisis’ and ‘Ktistes’.
208

Milns, ‘Greek writers’, 361.

209

See Dihle, ‘Arabien und Indien’, p. 41, on the outdatedness of Herodotus’ information.

210

Dihle, ‘Conception’.

211

Fraser’s comments on the textual genealogy of the Alexander romance ( Cities ofAlexander, pp. 205—26)

provide a starting point on this topic; in general, George Cary, The medieval Alexander (Cambridge
University Press, 1956); W. Will and J. Heinrichs (eds.), Zu Alexander dem Grossen. Festschrift G.

Wirth (Amsterdam: Hakkert, 1988), vol. II; Margaret Bridges and J. Christoph Burgel (eds.), The
problematics ofpower: eastern and western representations ofAlexander the Great (Bern: Lang, 1996).

6o

Creation ofa discourse

Alexander’s expedition was remarkably slow in having any effect. This may

mean that it did not make much of an impact on geography after all.
Though Megasthenes was not actually part of the expedition, he came in
its aftermath, even its immediate aftermath if we are to follow Bosworth’s
dating.
is

212

Arrian’s conflation of Megasthenes with the Alexander historians

a way of placing him at the head of the canon, and conferring on him

the authority that could come only from autopsy, and particularly autopsy

of a celebrated historical moment. The status he gains in this way is borne
out by the relative credibility he wins in later tradition, often at the expense

of Ctesias. If Megasthenes seemed the best authority on India to authors
such as Strabo and Pliny, it might be that he was by their time fuller and

more complete compared with others available.
Once autopsy became part of the Indographic tradition, it gained an
importance that it was never to lose. From the time of Herodotus it
became a major focus of claims to historiographic credibility. 213 From the
point of view of authors it is something that may be called a strategy of
authentication: a literary trope that comes increasingly to serve as a guar-

antee for the truth-value of its larger context. In broader terms, it may be
seen as a part of a process of rationalisation that takes place in the early

development of Greek historiography. Thus it is no accident that the above
account is largely an account of individual travellers to India, rather than
writers about India. If we accept, a priori, that there must have been other
travellers whom we do not know about, including commercial travellers, it
would be more realistic to view individual authors as landmarks in a changing body of information. For various reasons, then, a modern analysis of
this material must be careful to keep autopsy in its place, and not to take it

too seriously as a guarantee of anything at all. Certainly, it would be inappropriate to view autopsy as a strict antithesis to other kinds of knowledge,
gained in a supposedly less direct manner. Furthermore, talk about autopsy

tends to lose focus of the fact that representative objects (in this case Indian
goods) could be seen outside of their original contexts. From what we know

of the Achaemenid court, it is very likely that various goods and people

from India would have found their way there, as tribute, as taxes and as
Seen in this light, the autopsy of Megasthenes and others should be
seen in broader terms. To be sure it does not ensure the truth-value of any
gifts.

report,

however much it might overshadow other questions about relia-

bility. In historical terms this is unjustified, though, given that there must
have been other visitors to India (especially traders who don’t show up in

212

‘Historical setting’.

213

Schepens, Autopsie, Thomas, Herodotus in context, pp. 235-47.

Achaemenid India and Alexander

61

the literary record), and there may even have been other accounts. From

what Strabo tells us, Deimachus was another Megasthenes qua traveller and
214
The same
writer (and liar), but one who happens not to have survived.
can be said later for Dionysius; and for Patrokles, who is cited by Strabo
in seven substantial fragments on India, his authority deriving from his
circumnavigation of the Caspian and Hyrcanian Seas (T3).

215

Awareness

of the Persian court as a place where people and objects from India could
be seen, and a place where a number of Greeks could be found, in fact, is

one step in the direction of breaking up autopsy as an absolute criterion of
credibility.

Another effect of the emphasis on autopsy is to make this a history of
successive ‘discoverers’. This may well have been appropriate up to a point,

but it obscures the possibility that other travellers may have contributed
to the sum of knowledge about India. In other words, the natural dangers

of the ‘big man’ approach to history are here compounded by uncritical
216
In general, this story
acceptance of autopsy as a guarantee of accuracy.
gives ample evidence of a tendency to elide the historical personages of
particular authors with their reliability as historical writers. The history of

the periplus as a literary form makes a certain amount of room for firstperson narration, yet it does not demand it. From Hecataeus the periplus
is

a key means of making sense of the land, but

limitations in covering the hinterland.

one that has obvious

What it does provide is a neat,

sequential structure for viewing and describing foreign lands. Nowhere is
this

more clearly shown than in Nearchus’ work, as far as we can judge

from Arrian’s Indica, itself a late instance but one that exhibits the deep
structure of the periplus

117
.

One of the larger questions to arise may be simply stated: should we speak
of Greek information about India as if it were conveyed or created? The
tendency in previous accounts, and to some degree in this one, has been to
operate from the assumption that information about places and people, of
something concretely ‘out there’, is passively collected and transmitted in

good faith. There is much to recommend such an approach in the historical

114

2.1.9 C70, after Eratosthenes; cf. 2.1. 19 C76. For the fragments of Deimachus

215

FGrH 717 and 712 respectively.

216

see

FGrH 716.

one thing to focus on individual authors per se\ however, to focus expressly on individual
with
travellers is to present ancient geographical knowledge through the framework of ‘discoverers

It is

,

its

connotations of nineteenth-century colonial travel. Notable examples are Daniel J. Boorstin,

The discoverers (New York: Random, 1983), and, in ancient studies, M. Cary, The ancient explorers,
E. H. Warmington (Baltimore: Penguin, 1963).
217
Grant Parker, ‘Porous connections: the Mediterranean and the Red Sea’, Thesis Eleven 67 (2001),
rev.

59

- 79

-

62

Creation ofa discourse

reconstruction of a body of knowledge such as this: it engages with the

geographic and ethnographic realities described, and, where appropriate,
gives the sources due credit for doing so. This is an historically productive

method which makes the best of such evidence as there is for reconstructing a regional history of this period. On the other hand, however, if we
bear in mind the intrinsic scarcity of information about an area so far from
its Mediterranean points of articulation,

a different picture might emerge.

A little ‘real’ information must go a long way, and so in practice there
is

much scope for embroidery

2,18

The process of embroidery can involve

.

the transposing of features from one edge of the earth to another, as, for

example, in the case of Ethiopia 219
.

It

achieves little to ascribe this cre-

ative aspect to ‘entertainment literature’, in itself an unhelpful appellation,

implying that entertainment was the province of one particular branch of
literature, for among early Ionian historians particularly it might represent

a perfectly serious attempt to conceptualise the ends of the earth. The role

of geographical writing in the development of Greek historiography is well

known 210
.

We have seen here the beginnings of a process by which knowledge
is

canonised, amid competing claims for authority in the historical, geo-

graphic or specifically ethnographic spheres: the dynamics of that canon are
typically shaped by questions of the writer’s truthfulness, frequently related
to that of autopsy

221

.

name of authority that Indographers com-

It is in the

pete with one another, or others fight battles on behalf of authors. The

marvellous quality of much of this information is apparent from its very
beginnings, and is both an inspiration and a challenge to the emerging

canon of Greek prose writing.

To put the above analysis into perspective, we might take a moment to
consider what is absent from the Indian image outlined here. For one thing,
there is no evidence of Greek attempts to make sense of Indian religious or

118

In the study of Roman historiography it has been claimed that a certain degree of ‘embroidery’ was
an intrinsic part of the literary genre of history: A. J. Woodman, Rhetoric in classical historiography

(London: Croom Helm, 1988). By the same token, ancient views of accuracy were narrower than
modern, and applied more to contemporary than early history: T. J. Luce, ‘Ancient views on the
causes of bias in historical writing, Cl. Phil. 84 (1989), 16-31.

by A. Brian Bosworth, Plus $a change
‘

.

.

.

A more traditional view

is

reasserted

Ancient historians and their sources’, Cl. Ant. 22 (2003),

167-97. h should be noted that this debate concerns only historiographic texts, rather than the
fuller range discussed in the current chapter.
219

220

Romm, Edges.
See e.g. Hornblower, ‘Introduction’, in Greek historiography, ed. Hornblower, pp. 1-72, at 14-15,
following Jacoby.

221

Marincola, Authority and tradition, esp. pp. 128-74; more generally Bruce Lincoln, Authority: construction and corrosion (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994).

Achaemenid India and Alexander

63

literary texts, an absence that is all the more striking in comparison with

British colonialism and the scholarship it produced

222
.

The same can be

said for Indian language. As we have seen, Indian holy people certainly

did make an impression on Greeks, but they seem to be a late arrival
to

Greek Indography. In terms of Momigliano’s analysis, we might say

that Greeks knew about India before they knew about Indian wisdom

223
.

Exactly why this should have been so cannot easily be explained, but it

must have to do with the fact that the earliest Greek ideas about India were
formed in the Achaemenid empire 224 It appears as if Achaemenid notions
of India concerned commodities more than holy persons. In any case, the
.

Iranian world has its own traditions of religious virtuosi, so that Indian

holy persons would not have struck Persian observers to the degree they
impressed Greeks.
‘For all their denunciations the early Hellenistic writers saw the world

through Herodotean eyes .’ 225 It has even been claimed that the Histories
226
The Egyptian logos
were used in the planning of Alexander’s expedition
.

constituting book 2 is the most obvious case in point. At the very least

we can say that Herodotus’ work came to offer later generations a body of
geographical and ethnographic knowledge which was not soon surpassed,

and that in this he was important even for the many writers who criticised
him. It does appear, though, that Herodotus’ description of India in itself
never gained the canonical status that those of Ctesias, Megasthenes and
others would do later. Indeed, Herodotus’ passages on India are no more

than digressions, of no great importance in their own terms.

As we try to assess whether India in Greek thinking was either a particular space or a place-marker with transferable features, we are faced with a

paradox. On the one hand, the story told in this chapter is one of increas-

ing knowledge of India as a specific, particular place, subject to specific
descriptions and scholarly controversies. Both Ctesias and Megasthenes are
subject to extensive critique of detail.

On the other hand, the elements

of that image were fixed at an early stage, its elements having much in
common with other distant parts of the world, particularly Aethiopia. This
222

Dihle, ‘Indien und die hellenistisch-romische Welt’, 156; contrast, on the modern period, Thomas

223

Alien wisdom see further Chapter 6 below.

224

By this reckoning, the vivid image of India as a place of special knowledge (explored in Chapter 6 )
is a later, retrospective phenomenon, dating to the Hellenistic and Roman periods, by which time
there was already a certain conception of India in the Greek world (a conception stemming literally
from the Achaemenid empire).

225

Murray, ‘Herodotus’, 205.

226

Murray, ‘Herodotus’, 206 n. 1; further developed by G. W. Bowersock, ‘Herodotus, Alexander, and

R. Trautmann, Aryans and British India (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997).
:

Rome’, The American Scholar 58 (1989), 407-14.

Creation ofa discourse

64

was an image that would never be completely shaken off, even much later
under the Roman empire, despite substantial increments of detail resulting
from commercial contact.

As to the purposes we might reconstruct for early Greek accounts of
India,

it

is

unhelpful to try to make a rigid distinction between strate-

gic information and propaganda on one hand and entertainment on the
other.

127

The discourse about India has all these elements, which emerge at

different points with greater or lesser clarity. Such elements take on different

proportions between one author and another in which they are found. And
they take on different degrees of importance depending whether we are
considering, say, the use of Scylax’ reports at Darius’ court, or the reception

of Ctesias in the elder Pliny. Therefore analyses of purpose must remain
speculative, and are in any case seriously jeopardised by the indirectness

of textual transmission. The fragmentary quality of the texts is as clear a
reflection as

any that such information could be infinitely paraphrased,

reorganised and recontextualised: this in itself reflects the kinds of infor-

mation involved.
In the broader terms of Hellenistic history, these texts are a response to an
expanding world, and as such respond to ‘the shock of discovery’. But this

shock was the less sudden for having been pre-empted by Persian knowledge
of Sindh. So if this was a shock at all, it was a slow one, much slower
than ancient Alexander historiography allowed: the actual content of Greek
writings, focusing on marvellous creatures. At least some such objects, or

rather a kernel of historical fact lying behind them, must have been available
to Greeks at the Persian court. While it is hard for us to reconstruct Persian

ideas about India, we can be sure that there was some considerable degree

of contact between Indians and the Achaemenid empire, both in Persia
itself and in India;

we have also considered Greeks present in the Persian

court, particularly Scylax and Ctesias. Writings about Alexander himself
reveal

an intensified emphasis on exaggeration, as we see for example in

Strabo’s comments on ‘flattery’: the greatness of the man is linked with the

greatness of the world conquered by him.
*

Despite its marginal position, or because of it, India had a threefold impact

on Greek intellectual history. First, with regard to maps: in the early days
of cartography, we see that India served as a place-marker, initially by
constituting part of the schematic continental structures (Hecataeus), later
227

Both Zambrini, ‘Indika’, and Sherwin-White and Kuhrt, Samarkhand to Sardis pp. 93—101, stress
,

military-political contexts in their studies of Megasthenes, whereas

Ctesias) emphasises the entertainment value of marvellous tales.

Romm, Edges, pp. 86-8 (on

Achaemenid India and Alexander

65

by defining the direction of winds and filling out the shape of the continents;
and yet later, by the time of Eratosthenes, in making it possible to measure
the extent of the inhabited world. Secondly, carried by similar momentum
initially, India played a role in the development of historiography. It was
in critical discussions of Ctesias that the issue of veracity became especially
urgent in the early fourth century. As we have seen, this was often related

to autopsy and thus to the self-conscious development of historiography.
Some of the same issues would be important, in different ways, to the

evolution of the novel. Thirdly, the sense of India’s fertility and profusion
gave it a prominent place in natural history, particularly in the work of

Theophrastus. This would have an enormous impact on later writers such
as Pliny and Aelian, for

whom nature came to mean something different

of
to what it had meant to Aristotle: in an important sense, Pliny’s idea
nature is a direct response to the Indus Valley as a geographical space. In
other words, very broadly speaking, this idea of nature is a way of making
sense of a palpably non-Mediterranean ecology.

To end this chapter, it is fitting to revisit Bevan’s tripartite division
-

with which it began. It will be apparent that the supposed three phases
Ionian from the later sixth century BC to the
(1) pre-Alexandrian, mostly
fourth; (2) Alexander’s expedition itself; and (3) the aftermath of Alexander—
cannot be sustained, given the high degree of overlap between the second

and third. What is more, Herodotus stands out among the first group for
people and
his focus on human customs and his omission of monstrous
animals, in which respects he looks forward to later writers on India. Yet
becomes canonical but
it is not Herodotus’ own account of India which
those of later authors, notably Megasthenes, if we look at texts such as those
of Strabo and Pliny, in which this tradition is subject to detailed critique

and re-establishment of authority. A related question concerns the extent
the
to which Alexander’s campaign was itself an ethnographic moment,
particular point at which India and Indians came into Greek view. There
But
status.
this
deserve
does
campaign
the
for
extent,
can be no doubt that
it

must be conceded that the basic features of the Alexandrian and post-

Alexandrian image of India were already present in Herodotus and Ctesias.
The major exception to this is the Indian holy person, who will largely
be the subject of the sixth chapter. Well before Alexander’s expedition,
the Achaemenid empire was a decisive context for the formation of Greek

images of India. By around 300 bc, with the appearance of Megasthenes’
Indika, the elements of Roman Indography were already established.

PART II
Features ofa discourse

CHAPTER 2
India described

So far as I am able to judge, nothing has been left undone, either by
man or Nature, to make India the most extraordinary country that
the sun visits on his round. Nothing seems to have been forgotten,
nothing overlooked. Always, when you think you have come to the
end of her tremendous specialties and have finished hanging tags upon
her

.

.

.

another specialty crops up and another tag is required

.

.

.

Perhaps it will be simplest to throw away the tags and generalize her

with one all-comprehensive name, as the Land of Wonders.
Mark Twain (1897)

1

Marvels and monsters characterised Hellenistic accounts of India, even
more so than the earliest Greek accounts, as the first chapter has shown.
Furthermore, it is clear that this marvel-based view of India was typical of

Greek descriptions of the ends of the earth generally, and in many respects

was not unique to India. We also identified there the doxographic problem:
the phenomenon whereby our knowledge of an earlier text is contingent on
the context and purposes of its preservation within a later (sometimes much
later) text. This is particularly true of Megasthenes, who is usually regarded
as a privileged witness, though his work is transmitted purely in fragments.

Whereas, in Chapter 1, the emphasis was on the earlier texts, reconstructed
as plausibly as possible, here it is necessary to concentrate instead on texts

of Rome’s early to high imperial periods, many of which preserve those very
fragments. At issue here is the reception of the earlier texts, and their relation
to newly acquired knowledge. Focusing on Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Pliny

the Elder, Arrian and others, we must still be attuned to specific themes of
Indography; but now, in particular, we are in a position to consider the larger

contexts within which India featured in Roman thinking. This chapter will
thus involve close literary analysis of Indographic passages in the contexts

of their reception. The main question here is: what are the literary devices
used for describing India and its inhabitants? As we attempt a detailed
Following the Equator: a journey around the world, 2 vols. (New York: Harper, 1897), vol. II, p. 243.

69

.

Features ofa discourse

70

answer, one issue to be borne continually in mind is that of sources, and

of the ways in which various kinds of topographic information can be
juxtaposed, indeed of the relation between ethnography, topography and

geography within these particular texts.
In the larger contexts of Indography, an important distinction should be

made at the start, even if it is merely an analytical one. On the one hand
there are works in which specific consideration of India takes centre-stage,

even if that is only for a limited part of a work. Thus, for example, both
Strabo and Pliny discuss India at some length in the course of their surveys

of world chorography; likewise, in briefer compass, Pomponius Mela. It is
in fact Pliny who mentions the younger Seneca’s now lost treatise on India 2
The significance of this text stretches beyond an Indographic perspective 3
.

:

for one thing, as a fully fledged ethnographic treatise it would have predated

Tacitus’ Germania, the oldest surviving example of this genre in Latin.

On the other hand, far outweighing these sources in bulk, are works that
merely contain passing references to India, works on any variety of topics 4
.

In fact, the digression was the most common literary form for conveying

ethnographic information 5 This practice was well established by the time
.

of Herodotus, and it was so common by the time of Polybius that he
regards it with critical distance

6
.

For current purposes the distinction may

be summed up as follows: either India is described in its own right, or in
ways that make it subordinate to the larger concerns of the work. In order
to assess this distinction and its implications, we shall begin by considering

some of the authors for whom India features prominently, concentrating
on those from the first category.
2

At 6.60 he says, Seneca etiam apud nos temptata Indiae commentatione

.

.

.

This and other sources are

collected in F. Haase’s edition of Senecas fragments (Leipzig: Teubner, 1903), frr. 9-12. Seneca is also

supposed to have written a treatise de situ et sacris Aegyptiorum (Serv. adAen. 6.154).
3

Pace Dieter Flach, ‘Die Germania des Tacitus in ihrem literaturgeschichtlichen Zusammenhang’, in

Beitragezum Verstandnis der Germania des Tacitus ed. Herbert Jankuhn and Dieter Timpe (Gottingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1989), pp. 27-58, who follows the dismissive attitude of earlier scholars.
,

Allan A. Lund, Versuch einer Gesamtinterpretation der Germania des Tacitus’, A/VftWTI.33.3 (1991),
‘

pp. 1858-988, esp. i860, stresses the uniqueness of the Germania
4 In the collection of Andr£ and Filliozat,
Linde vue de Rome, this latter category predominates by far.

The distinction is of course somewhat unfair, given the imbalance between them. Tacitus’ Germania
stands out for its degree of engagement with a foreign people, its social life and mindset.
5

6

Allan A. Lund, Zum Germanenbild der Romer (Heidelberg: Winter, 1990), p. 19.

Note the apologetic tone of 3.57. In this respect compare lug. 17. 1-2. Sallust says that his excursus
on African ethnogeography is occasioned by the fact that few know about such a remote place, and
begs his readers indulgence by claiming to be as brief as possible: sed quae loca et nationes ob calorem
aut asperitatem, item solitudines minus frequentata sunt, de iis baudfacile conpertum narrauerim. cetera

quam paucissimis absoluam. ‘But, concerning those places and groups that are less often visited on
account of the heat or harsh conditions or desert, I have recounted what I have found out not without
difficulty. As for the rest, let

me dispense with them in as few words as possible.’

7i

India described

I.

CONTEXTS OF INDOGRAPHY
1 1. Historiography
.

Within the genre of historiography the Alexander historians bulk large.
Partly overlapping with them is the universal history of Diodorus Siculus
took the history of
(fl. c. 60—30 bc). The forty books of his Bibliotheke
7
the Mediterranean world from mythological times down to Caesar. Less
than half survives in its original form, though further parts were quoted
8
or paraphrased by later writers. Of his life little is known. A major part
of Diodorus’ project, being a universal history, is to integrate the narratives of Greek and Roman events. India features mainly in the light of
Alexander’s expedition (2.35—42). Compared with other historians writing

about Alexander, Diodorus stands out for the amount of detail he gives,
7
including the fullest surviving Greek account of Indian social divisions. It
is

in Diodorus that we find an account of Iambulus’ journey to the Island

of the Sun, and thence to the coast of India and to the city of Pataliputra
(Palibothra) on the Ganges.

10

Of the historians that devoted entire works to Alexander, Quintus
Curtius Rufus will occur frequently in the pages that follow. He is of special
interest,

not only as someone writing in Latin about Alexander, but also

because the highly wrought rhetorical style of his work reflects the influence
11
of the schools. But none demands as much attention as Arrian (Flavius
Arrianus of Nicomedia, d. in or after 170).

11

His monograph on the Alans,

an Iranian tribe, is lost, and so are the histories of his native Bithynia and
of the Parthian empire. Arrian’s public career brought him a number of

7 In so far as this is a universal history it is considered also in Chapter 5 below.
8

Sacks, Diodorus Siculus.

9

Note especially the passage attributed by Jacoby to Megasthenes, Chapter 1, section II. 2 above.

10

Diod. 2.55—60, inviting comparison with the brief reference at Lucian s Ver. hist. 1.3. This
an abbreviated account, especially since it is in the third person, whereas Iambulus wrote originally
is

in the first person. See further Diskin Clay and Andrea Purvis, Four island

likely

utopias (Newburyport,

MA: Focus, 1999), pp. 107-14.
11

The question of his dates is not easily put to rest, though a general consensus has emerged in recent
by John
decades: arguments for dating, coming down on the early reign of Claudius, are assessed
The
E. Atkinson, ‘Q. Curtius Rufus’ Historiae Alexandri Magni\ ANRWW .34.4 (1998), 3447-83.
author was, in all probability, identical with the rhetor mentioned by Suetonius in his Rhet. Even
discernible impact on the
if there is some argument for a slightly later dating, that would have no
current topic.

12

University of
For a general discussion, see Philip A. Stadter, Aman of Nicomedia (Chapel Hill:
North Carolina Press, 1980), pp. 115-32. Christian Jacob presents Arrians Alexander as a traveller:

‘Alexandre et la maitrise de l’espace. L’Art du voyage dans 1 < <Anabase>> d Arrien
’

Storia 34 (1991), 5-4°-

,

Quademi di

Features ofa discourse

72.

administrative and military posts in various parts of the empire. If it is true
that Trajan’s military programme and his imitation of Alexander gave special significance to any contemporary history of Alexander’s campaigns , 13
it will be

important to be alert to possible resonances between Arrian’s and

Trajan’s interests in India.

In the Indica, the work sometimes counted the eighth book of the Anaba-

Arrian makes good his promise to discuss India’s ethnographic and geographic details in greater detail than the narrative frame of the main work

sis,

allowed (5.5. 1-2).' 4 In effect, he narrates Nearchus’ return voyage. Only
the first seventeen chapters, strictly speaking, are devoted to the description of places and people, but the remaining twenty-six chapters, continuing the story of Nearchus’ and Alexander’s campaign, reveal a concern
for topographical detail.' 5

Whereas the Anabasis is written in Attic, the

Indica is written in Ionic, a fact that may express Arrian’s homage to the

Herodotean tradition of ethnography, if not to Herodotus himself.' 6 By
virtue of its focus on Alexander, the Indica ‘is in no sense an account of

India in Roman times’.' 7

Arrian indicates his debt to both Nearchus and Megasthenes, ‘two
esteemed authors’ (17.6), to lend authority to his own work by valorising his sources.' 8 In the introductory, scientific-geographical chapters of
the Indica it is, however, to Eratosthenes that he appeals (3.1). Arrian has

not been to India himself, but his closest point of contact with his material
is his personal knowledge of two tributaries of the Ister, namely the Enus
and the Saus: the context is his claim that the Ister and the Nile are com-

parable with the Indus and the Ganges (4.9). 19 This represents a coming

together of two different sources of authority: those of autopsy and of book
learning.

1 2 Geography
.

.

The most substantial topographical work to survive from antiquity is the
Geography of Strabo of Amaseia in Galatia (64/63 bc to c. ad 21), which
also contains the lengthiest description of India in any ancient text. For its
13

14

Albrecht Dihle, Greek and Latin literature of the Roman empire (London: Routledge, 1994), p. 243.
In so far as this should be regarded as an independent work, it defies the view that Tacitus’ Germania
is

the only surviving ancient ethnographic monograph (Lund, Germanenbild p. 19).
,

15

16

17
18

Examples are the descriptions of the Ichthyophagi (29) and of Carmania (32).
Albin Lesky, A history of Greek literature (London: Routledge, 1966), p. 848; Stadter, Arrian

p. 116.

Yet Arrian’s praise for Megasthenes is elsewhere qualified: he did not see much of India, nonetheless

more so than Alexander’s companions did (5.3).
19

,

Stadter, Arrian, p. 117.

Stadter, Arrian, p. 120.

India described

73

author, who was a Stoic by training, geography was a branch of philosophy:

he says he aimed to provide a work that would be useful and helpful. Despite
his own sojourn in Rome after 44 bc, he chose to write in Greek rather
than Latin: it was not only his native tongue but also the language of
intellectual discourse.

Given the global scale of Strabos Geography

,

it is

important to compare that text with contemporary and earlier universal
20
India makes two major appearances within the seventeen books
histories.
of Strabo: first at the beginning of his second book, while he discusses his
own methodology and those of his predecessors, including Eratosthenes,
as well as issues involving the size of the earth;

21

and secondly, in the course

of a lengthy description of Asia (15. 1. 1—73 C685— 720). Asia (books 11— 16)
comes between Europe (3-10) and Africa (17) as Strabo moves clockwise
22

around the Mediterranean.
A Latin Strabo of lesser technical sophistication and on a more modest
scale is Pomponius Mela, whose Chorographia comprises three books and
23
can be dated to the middle of the first century ad. The first two books are
devoted to parts of the Mediterranean coastline and their adjacent interior;
overlooked
it is in the third book that we find India, one of the regions

in this basic schema. Mela diverges from the Greek pattern by proceeding

anti-clockwise from the Straits of Gibraltar, i.e. beginning with Mauretania
24
and Numidia, rather than clockwise, with Spain. India, including the
25
Ganges valley, and its adjoining islands receive brief mention at 3. 61-71.
Even making provision for the much smaller scale of Mela s work, it is
comparison
in
coverage
clear that Asia receives a much lesser degree of
with Strabo. Mela’s orbis terrarum centers on the Mediterranean world in

narrower compass, and so it is not surprising that India receives so little
attention. While Mela’s text might seem at first to command little interest,
it

was in fact to prove a major conduit of geographical information between

antiquity and the western Middle Ages, in view of texts such as Solinus and

Pseudo-Aethicus, considered below.

20
J.

M. Alonso-Nunez, ‘An Augustan world history: the Historiae Philippicae of Pompeius Tragus’,

G&R 34 (1987), 56-72.
21

22

He mentions Megasthenes and Deimachus (e.g., 2.1.4 C69), Nearchus and Onesicritus (2.1.9 C70).
Katherine Clarke, ‘In search of the author of Strabos Geography JRS 87 (i997)> 9 2— no R- Syme,
-

,

Anatolica: studies in Strabo (Oxford: Clarendon, 1995), esp. pp. 256-67.
23

24
25

The terminus post quern of the work is Claudius’ invasion of Britain in ad 43-4 (3*49 — 53)- h ls quoted
history.
as a source by the elder Pliny, who mentions it several times in the first book of his Natural

On the Greek pattern visible in Strabo, see Jacoby, FGrH IIC 48-9.
On the textual tradition see C. M. Gormley, M. A. Rouse and R. H. Rouse, ‘The medieval circulation
of the “de chorographia” of Pomponius Mela’, Medieval Studies 46 (1984), 266—320; and in summary
form R. H. Rouse in Reynolds (ed.), Texts and transmission pp. 290-2.
,

Features ofa discourse

74

Roughly contemporary with Pomponius Mela is the anonymous Periplus
of the Erythraean Sea. Written in koine Greek, this work has been dated to
the decades ad 40 to 70, making it roughly contemporary with Mela and
26

Pliny.
This is a practical rather than a literary work, offering advice to
persons sailing two different routes: from the north eastern Red Sea, round

the Horn of Africa and down the east coast of Africa, to around Zanzibar;

and (in greater detail) from the same area, round the Gulf of Aden, across
the Arabian Sea and ultimately to the west coast of India. 27 Both of these
routes involved sailing with the monsoon winds. Given the kinds of information offered in this text, and its style, this appears to have been written
by a merchant for others plying the same route. It focuses on the com-

modities that can be obtained or exchanged at individual ports en route,

and advice on sailing and trading conditions at those ports. Indeed, in
view both of its content and style, it gives the impression of a conversation overheard;

its

very survival, via a tenth-century codex now at Hei-

delberg, seems particularly fortuitous. This work is of central importance
in assessing the exchange of commodities between India and the Roman

world.

Claudius Ptolemy lived around ad 90-168, and is today best known
for his astronomical treatise Almagest. His Geography lists more than 8,000

places in Europe, Africa and Asia, according to their latitude and longitude.

Ptolemy himself distinguishes his large-scale geography, which is scientific

and mathematical, from the more detail-bound chorography, what would
in Latin be called topography

(1.1). This was essentially a Greek tradition, ardently pursued in Hellenistic times by Eratosthenes and others,
though Pliny and other Latin writers show some awareness of it. Ptolemy’s

Geography may be regarded as the culmination of this tradition. 28 As important as Ptolemy’s text was for the long-term history of cartography, it had
little

impact on most of the Indographic authors in the period discussed

in this book. Whereas Strabo is dismissive of geographical information
gleaned by traders, Ptolemy makes it clear that both he and his predecessor

26

Lionel Casson (ed.), The Periplus Maris Erythraei (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989),
p. 6.

27

To compare this text with modern printed sources of nautical information shows changes and
varieties of travel, even as it reiterates some of the same routes: in the early days of the Suez Canal,
Britain’s Hydrographic Office published The Red Sea pilot (London, 1873), with an equally practical
bent. At a time when seaborne commerce relies on different (electronic) media for such information,
would-be yachtsmen can still consult the book by Elaine Morgan and Stephen Davies, Red Sea pilot:
Aden to Cyprus znd edn (Huntingdon: Imray, 2002).
28
History of cartography ed. Harley and Woodward, vol. I, pp. 177-200; Wolfgang Hiibner, ‘The
,

,

Ptolemaic view of the universe’, GRBS 41 (2000), 59-93.

,

India described

75

Marinus set great store by the astronomical observations of those plying
the routes of the Erythraean Sea.

29

Ptolemy’s India deserves special consideration here, given the importance of his Geography in the history of maps.

30

Together with the more

distant east, India occurs in the seventh and last book of the Geography

,

and is divided into four sections (7.1.1). First, India this side of the Ganges;
second, beyond the Ganges; third, the location of Sinai (whose inhabi31
tants include Aithiopes ichthyphagi ), and whose eastern side borders with
unknown lands); and fourth, Taprobane and other islands. The remainder
of the work is devoted to a descriptive summary of world maps, of the
,

armillary sphere and to a general summary by way of concluding the work
as a whole. It is clear,

from any analysis of the geographical co-ordinates

specified in the text, that Ptolemy’s India is not a subcontinent or even

peninsula at all; instead it has a fairly straight coastline running from east to
west. 32 For Ptolemy, the Ganges represents the key dividing line. The Indus,

by contrast, is a valley supporting considerable settlement, rather than a
boundary of any kind. Thus the name ‘Indoscythia’ for one of the Indus
areas suggests, in Ptolemy’s view, an area whose cultural traditions combine
those of both the Iranian plateau and the Indus Valley. ‘Gymnosophists’
are mentioned as an ethnic group living toward the eastern side, near the

Ganges (7.1. 51). With the partial exception of rivers, which are prominent
in this section of the Geography (e.g., 7.1.29—41), there is nothing that substantively differentiates India from other parts of the world described by

Ptolemy. Within this scheme, India, no less so than the Mediterranean, has

29

Note for example chs. 7 (Diodorus the Samian); 9 (one Diogenes) and 17 (where the traders
information about India is balanced against that of local inhabitants); cf. J. Lennart Berggren and
Alexander Jones, Ptolemy’s Geography: an annotated translation ofthe theoretical chapters (Princeton
University Press, 2000), p. 25. Contrast Strabo 15. 1.4 C686.

30

Louis Renou (ed.), La Geographie de Ptolemee, L’Inde (VII, 1-4) (Paris: Champion, 1925). Ptolemy’s
description of these parts provided the basis for an extensive work of topography and ethnography:

G. E. Gerini, Researches on Ptolemy’s geography ofEastern Asia (Farther India and Indo-Malay Peninsula) (London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1909). Cf. J. R. Sinnatamby, Sri Lanka in Ptolemy’s Geography

(Colombo: n.p., 1968). The Geography is currently in the process of systematic editing: Alfred
Stiickelberger, ‘Ptolemy and the problem of scientific perception of space’, in Space in the Roman

world ed. Talbert and Brodersen, pp. 27-40, at 31.
31

Nicholas Purcell, ‘Eating fish: the paradoxes of seafood’, in Food in antiquity, ed. John Wilkins
et al. (University of Exeter Press, 1995), pp. 132-49, shows that fish-eating can be the hallmark of

32

This geographical framework, buoyed by a resurgence of interest in Ptolemy, endured until after
Vasco da Gama’s expedition of 1498. Ananda Abeydeera, ‘The geographical perceptions of India and

barbarian customs. Cf. Gerini, Researches, pp. 255—6, on Ichthyophagoi Aithiopes.

Ceylon in the Periplus Maris Erythraei and in Ptolemy’s Geography Terrae Cognitae 30 (1998), 1-25,
reports this anomaly, as well as the absence of any apparent explanation for it. For a reconstruction
of Ptolemy’s map on the basis of the co-ordinates he gives, see E. H. Bunbury, A history of ancient
geography, 2nd edn (New York: Dover, 1959), opposite p. 578.

76

Features ofa discourse

definite places that can be mapped by co-ordinates. It abounds with cities
(

poleis ).

What does, however, mark this part of the world as exotic is the

nudity of some of its inhabitants, such as the Nangalogai (7.2.18) and the
island-dwelling Aginnatai (7.2.26).

Ptolemy himself was largely forgotten by the medieval world, both eastern and western; but later Byzantine manuscripts reveal revived interest in

him, 33 a revival that spread to Italy with the migration of Byzantine scholars
in the late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. 34 In 1406 the Geography was

translated into Latin by Jacopo Angeli da Scarperia, and this brought the

work a much wider readership in the west. The rediscovery of Ptolemy was
to have a major impact on cartography and seafaring in the early modern
period, and the history of editions of Ptolemy closely matches the path of
cartographic innovation: for example, the world maps produced by Martin
Waldseemiiller in the early 1500s reflect a dialogue between Ptolemy’s text

and the new territorial discoveries. 35 One of the critical questions in the
history of cartography was whether the Indian Ocean was an inland sea,
in other words, whether it was possible to sail round the Cape of Good
Hope and reach South Asia by that route. This was proven when Vasco da

Gama arrived in Goa in 1497, but it took several years for this new information to be reflected in European maps. The Ptolemaic and the Plinian
traditions emerged very differently in the history of European mapmaking:

the one becoming the basis for maps in the early modern period, the other

informing the marvel tradition of the western Middle Ages. 36

Though, as Chapter 1 shows, the story of Dionysus’ invasion of India
goes back to Alexander’s expedition, 37 it is in the Dionysiaca of Nonnus of

Panopolis (fl. 450-70) that the relevant section is found. Thus it is not till
33

34

Maximus Planudes in late thirteenth-century Byzantium played a major role in the rediscovery of
Ptolemy: O. A. W. Dilke, ‘Cartography in the Byzantine empire’, in History of cartography, ed.
Harley and Woodward, vol. I, pp. 258-75 at 258-59.
The most significant manuscript of Ptolemy’s Geography, Urb. gr. 82, travelled to Florence in 1397
with Chrysoloras, its probable owner: see further N. G. Wilson, From Byzantium to Italy: Greek
studies in the Italian Renaissance (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992), p. 9; Grafton,

New worlds, p. 49.
35

E.g. O. A. W. Dilke, ‘The culmination of Greek cartography in Ptolemy’, in History ofcartography,

ed. Harley and Woodward, vol. I, pp. 177-200 at 177; Shankar Raman, Framing ‘India

the colonial

imaginary in early modem culture (Stanford University Press, 2002), esp. pp. ro8-2i. Columbus
possessed a 1478 Latin translation, annotating it in the section on the circumference of the earth:

Alfred Stiickelberger, ‘Kolumbus und die antiken Wissenschaften’, Archiv fiir Kulturgeschichtc 69
(1987), 331-40.
36

37

Abeydeera, ‘Geographical perceptions’, and Tony Campbell, The earliest printed maps, 1472-1400
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987), esp. pp. 122-6.
See Chapter 1, section II. 1; and see especially Bosworth, Alexander and the East, pp. 98-132. In
addition, according to Pierre Chuvin, Nonnus’ fictional India incorporates elements of the Iranian

world of the late second century ad (drawn from a lost source posited by Chuvin): ‘Local traditions

India described

77

the fifth century that the fullest ancient version of the story was recounted,
in books 13-48 of elaborate Greek hexameter. This episode makes up the

bulk of the poem, which consists of forty-eight books.

38

If Ptolemy’s text had a distinctive history in antiquity and beyond, then

the Christian topography of Cosmas Indicopleustes stands awkwardly, even
eccentrically, in the history of Indography. Dating from the mid-sixth century, this text combines theological and geographical discussions. Cosmas’

eleventh book includes a detailed description of the island of Taprobane,

modern Sri Lanka. Of the many works that we know Cosmas to have
written, the Christian topography is the only one to survive in more than

fragments. But in fact the work in

its

current form does not sit easily

between two covers: the longer of the two prologues to survive discusses
the contents of the first five books only, and this suggests that the work may
have originally ended at that point. The remaining seven books involve a
high degree of repetition, not only between each other but also with the

The differences between the two surviving prefaces suggest
When we get to
the eleventh book, where Sri Lanka and to some extent India and Ethiopia
are discussed at length, the focus of the work has moved considerably from

first six books.

that the fuller version was the product of a second edition.

the theoretical geography of the first few books to topography and natural
history: several animals and plants are recounted in detail. For the present,
it is sufficient to

notice the variety within the work, and the possibility that

the work in its current form preserves excerpts from Cosmas’ other works,

now lost.
Cosmas argues for a rectangular universe, in the shape of a vault, and
matching that of the Tabernacle. His literal interpretation of the scriptures is
39 This cosmological
in keeping with the Nestorian group based at Nisibis.
vision brought him into conflict with the Aristotelian philosopher John
Philoponus, a clash that emerges most clearly from Philoponus’ subsequent

and classical mythology in the Dionysiaca in Studies in the Dionysiaca ofNonnus, ed. Neil Hopkinson
(Cambridge: Cambridge Philological Society, 1994), pp. 167—76.
’,

38

This number matches the Iliad and Odyssey combined, in keeping with Nonnus’ aim of matching
Homer, and even surpassing him in the dignity of his divine (as opposed to human) theme. In
a sketch of Dionysus’

Roman career, Glen Bowersock suggests that by Nonnus’ time Dionysus

had ‘become, for pagans and Christians alike, a powerful universalising god of salvation, whose
career brought together, in a common aretalogy the diverse legends and topographies of the farflung countries where Greek was, however imperfectly, understood’: ‘Dionysus as an epic hero’, in
39

Hopkinson, Studies, pp. 156-66, at 162.
Cosmas omits mention of Nestorians when he lists a number of ‘heresies’ (5.178—79). Cf. the
invectives of 6.25-27 and 30-32, which illustrate his tendency to repetition. The Three Chapters controversy brought him into conflict with John Philoponus, the contemporary Christian
Aristotelian.

Features ofa discourse

78

De opificio mundi (557-60). 40 The use of first-person narrative, in which
the monk Cosmas recalls his past trading ventures, invites comparison with

another work in which authority derives not from books but from personal
experience: the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea of some five centuries earlier,

though of course that work lacks Cosmas’ religious-philosophical content

and its polemical tone. 41

I. 3.

Natural history

Geography was a part of the encyclopaedic project of Pliny the Elder
(ad 23/24-79), but merely one among many presenting themselves under
the rubric of Nature ( Natura ). Despite a busy career in Roman administration and the military, Pliny wrote copiously in various genres, to judge

from the biographical information preserved by his adoptive son. 42 Born at

Comum to an equestrian family, he held senior posts in various parts of the
empire until his death by suffocation during an eruption of Vesuvius. Of
his numerous works, only the encyclopaedic Natural history remains today,

having been much read in western Europe of the Middle Ages and beyond.

Books 3-6 cover the physical geography of the ‘known world’ ( orbis ter43

rarum), area by area; within this frame, book 6.21-80 deals with India and
6.81-90 Sri Lanka ( Taprobane). Furthermore, in the seventh, anthropological book, a brief section is devoted to the monstrous creatures and strange

practices of India and Ethiopia (7.21-32). In its brevity, this amounts to
a rapid-fire summary of the detailed descriptions in book 6, though even

here Pliny does not neglect to mention his sources. 44

Though it cannot be claimed that India stands at the middle of his writing,

40

41

it

is

worth mentioning Aelian here (Claudius Aelianus, c. 172-235),

Wanda Wolska, La Topographie chretienne de Cosmas Indicopleustes: theologie et science au VP siecle
(Paris: Presses Universitaires, 1962), pp. 147-271, on Cosmas' cosmology.
Cosmas will receive further attention in Chapter 3, section I.4 below, in relation to the illustrations

he added to the Christian topography.
41

Letters 3.5; 6.16 and 6.20 (the last two being addressed to Tacitus). For a reading of the relevant
letters, stressing the variety of narrative frames and readers constructed, see Umberto Eco, ‘A portrait

of the Elder as a Young Pliny: how to build fame’, in On signs, ed. Marshall Blonsky (Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985).
43

A recent analysis of books 3-6 emphasises its triumphalist politics: Murphy, Pliny the Elder’s Natural

44

Among a recent resurgence of interest in Pliny the following also deserve mention: K. G. Sall-

History, pp. 129-64.

mann, Die Geographic des dlteren Plinius in ihrem Verhdltnis zu Varro (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1971);
G. E. R. Lloyd, Science, folklore and ideology (Cambridge University Press, 1983), esp. pp. 140-52;
Andrew Wallace-Hadrill, ‘The elder Pliny and man’s unnatural history’, G & 37 (1990), 80-96;
Mary Beagon, Roman nature: the thought ofPliny the Elder (Clarendon, 1992); Sorcha Carey, Pliny’s
catalogue of culture: art and empire in the Natural history (Oxford University Press, 2003).

India described

79

Roman literature is not restricted
to geographical and historical sources. Of his two miscellanies, his collec-

as a reminder that a concern with India in

tion of information about animals, the Trepi £dxov 18i6tt|TOS in seven-

teen books, frequently presents India as a place of zoological wonder. 45

While curiosities generally interest Aelian, it is striking that many of these
are linked to an Indian location, not unlike the pseudo-Aristotelian De

mirabilibus auscultationibus discussed in Chapter i. Thus the satyr-like creatures of 16.21 are specifically linked with the Indian region of Kolounda.

In keeping with the Stoic undercurrent of the work, this is attributed to

the wisdom of Nature. Indeed, one of the larger issues to deserve special
attention is the extent to which India is invoked as a way of emphasising
the extremes, if not the glories of Nature.

Born in Praeneste, Aelian was

a native speaker of Latin; his choice to write in Greek reflects the cachet

attached to the Greek language under the influence of the Second Sophistic

movement.

An extension of this catalogue into the early Middle Ages would reveal
a lively and varied tradition of Pliny’s Natural history. This emerges, in
fact, as

the text to have an ongoing impact on European perceptions of

India. In terms of the textual transmission of the work, different sections

were to have very different fates. 46 The textual reconstruction of Pliny’s
Indographic section is hampered by the fact that the prime manuscript for
the geographical books breaks off a few chapters short of the section on
India, with the result that editors must rely on the recentiores , which are of

varying quality. 47

But this is only part of the story. Pliny’s text was one of many to undergo
excerption and anthologising in the course of the second and third centuries.

The process by which anthologies were created out of larger works reflects
the creation of canons of text and the resultant desire to codify; it owes

something to the changing technologies of the ancient book, with the
48
increased use of the parchment codex as opposed to the papyrus roll.
Along with Mela, Pliny’s geographical books were to provide the core of

45

The other work, the Varia historia or ‘historical miscellany’, is mentioned below, Chapter 4, section

46

L. D. Reynolds, ‘The elder Pliny’, in Texts and transmission pp. 307-16, esp. 307.
See also Jan-Mayhoff(eds.), vi, on the Leidensis Vossianus known as A. Of book 6 it has only 6.41—51.
The surviving manuscript is the descendant of a tradition different to and seemingly better than

L5

.

,

47

,

that circulating in Europe.
48

Arno Borst, Das Buch in der Naturgeschichte. Plinius und seine Leser im Zeitalter des Pergaments
(Heidelberg: Winter, 1984); cf. Colin H. Roberts and T. C. Skeat, The birth of the codex (London:
British Academy, 1983), pp. 67-73; L. D. Reynolds and N. G. Wilson (eds.), Scribes and scholars: a
guide to the transmission of Greek and Latin literature 3rd edn (Oxford: Clarendon, 1991), pp. 31-6.
,

,

8o

Features ofa discourse

Solinus’ Collectanea 49
.

Here the abbreviated version omits Pliny’s source

criticism, however limited that may have been in the first instance. 50 It was

with Isidore of Seville’s Etymologiae or Origines that this tradition, which we

might call ‘Plinian’, was transmitted to the Latin Middle Ages, and helped
create a language for the description of distant people. In concrete terms, it

provided a framework and even a vocabulary for talking about the ends of
the earth and their inhabitants. The Cosmographia transmitted under the

name of Aethicus Ister’ is a prime case of the overlap in Latin topographical
writers after Mela and Pliny. 51 High medieval instances of this tradition are

Robert Cricklade and Vincent of Beauvais ( Speculum mundi); 52 even the
cartographic tradition seen in the Hereford map ( mappamundi) and the

Ebstorf world map reveals a debt to the contents and language of this
Plinian tradition. 53 These maps, together with other visual sources of the
Middle Ages, offer visual expression of the marvel tradition, as Chapter 3
below will show.

I.4. Romance

and mime

The Greek novels make considerable use of exotic settings, particularly in
the eastern Mediterranean and southwest Asia. So prominent are places

such as Ephesus, Babylonia and Ethiopia that earlier scholars posited an
eastern origin of such stories, if not the genre as a whole. 54 While such

an approach is no longer in favour, there remains the undeniable fact of
locale. It is here that India makes an inevitable, if limited appearance, in

several romances.

Thus, in the case of Xenophon of Ephesus’ Ephesian

tale , the heroine Anthia is bought by an Indian king and narrowly escapes

being shipped to India as a slave. Heliodorus’ Aithiopian tale contains a

few references to Indian commodities. Thus there are ‘herbs and roots that

49

The verdict that Solinus was ‘Pliny’s ape’ is overstated, stemming from anachronistic assumptions
about authorial originality. At all events, the textual tradition of Solinus shows the degree of overlap
with other Latin writers touching on geographic themes, such as Augustine, Isidore and later Aldhelm

and Bede: R. H. Rouse in Texts and transmission ed. L. D. Reynolds, pp. 391-3.
50

51

See, e.g., Marjorie Chibnall, ‘Pliny’s Natural history and the Middle Ages’, in Empire and aftermath,
ed. T. A. Dorey (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1975), pp. 57-78 at 59.
This text, which by its content and phrasing clearly belongs to a line of continuity between Pliny

and the late medieval world maps, begins with the well-known threefold division of continents. See
Geographi Latini Minores, ed. Alexander Riese (Heilbronn: Henning, 1878), pp. 71-103; also Reeve
in Reynolds, Texts and transmission, pp. 255-6, and Rouse in ibid., p. 290.
52

Chibnall, ‘Pliny’; cf. Reynolds ‘The elder Pliny’, in Texts and transmission, p. 313.

53

It has been suggested that Orosius

and Isidore were the key sources for these maps: von den Brincken,
cf. Lozovsky, The earth, pp. 69-78 on Orosius.
Ben Edwin Perry, The ancient romances (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967).

Kartographische Quellen
54

;

)

India described

81

grow in India, Ethiopia and Egypt’ (2.30.2); ‘precious necklaces and priceless gems from India and Ethiopia’ (8.11.8); and the ‘phoenix that comes
from Ethiopia or India’ (6. 3. 3). 55 In both works, the relevant scenes take
place in the Nile valley: whether the delta or Upper Egypt, this zone linking the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean offers considerable narrative
possibilities. The playing out of these possibilities will occupy us in due
course.

Atypically of the genre, Longus’ Daphnis and Chloe has a pastoral setting

and does not involve long-distance travel. But it does contain a reference
to the triumph of Dionysus, a literary reference to Alexander’s propaganda
concerning India’s past (4.3). In the middle point of the garden (paradeisos
that Longus describes at length is a temple and altar dedicated to Dionysus.

Inside the temple are paintings on subjects related to the god: alongside

the conquest of Indians (.Indoi nikomenoi) are scenes such as his birth, the
flaying of Pentheus, and the metamorphosis of the Etruscans.

This may be a brief and passing reference to India, but it is significant in
several ways. India occurs at the intersection of the verbal and the visual, as
if Longus is reminding us of the visual appeal of an Indian theme.

Indeed,

the scene described is that which survives on sarcophagus reliefs such as
that in the Walters Gallery in Baltimore.

56

Prominent in this ekphrasis is

the harmonious collaboration of art and nature. Again, India reflects the
glories of nature.
It is generally difficult to attach a date to the ‘famous five’

Greek novels,

and the three concerned are no exception: Xenophon of Ephesus’ Ephesian
tale and Longus’ Daphnis and Chloe both tend to be placed in the second
century ad, making them texts of the Second Sophistic, whereas the greater

complexity of Heliodorus’ lengthy Aithiopian tale suggests a later date,
perhaps between the mid-third and mid-fourth centuries ad.
India features also in a dramatic text (first or second century ad) that
survives in a fragmentary state among the

Oxyrhynchus papyri. 57 In it,

the young Greek woman Charition is held captive by the Indian king.
priestess

A

of Selene, she takes refuge in the goddess’ shrine. Her brother,

arriving with a party of Greeks, brings about her escape

by plying the

Indians with unmixed wine. This plot is reminiscent of the Greek novels

55

Philostr.

VA 3.49 speaks of India as the origin of the phoenix; more usually its locale is Arabia, e.g.

Hdt. 2.73; or Ethiopia, e.g. Ach. Tat. 3.25.
56

Notably the Walters Gallery sarcophagus, described in Chapter 3, section 1 2 below.

57

Charition Liberata (P. Oxy. 413), ed. Stefania Santelia (Bari: Levante, 1991); discussed as a kind of

.

‘pulp fiction’ by Mario Andreassi, ‘II mimo tra “consumo” e “letteratura”: Charition e Moicheutria \

Ancient Narrative 2 (2002), 30-46.

-

Features ofa discourse

82

and contains parallels, beyond that, with Euripides’ Iphigenia among the
Taurians. The Indians are characterised by unintelligible speech, which
presumably adds to the coarse humour of the drama. India is presented,
in this brief text, as a more vivid location than we find in the novels, and
the prominence of language is unmatched. Yet, in keeping with the genre
of mime, much more so than the novels, ethnic difference is exaggerated
for humorous effect. The drunken revels of the Indians, which allow the
protagonists to escape, again evoke the triumph of Dionysus.

ii.

‘hanging tags’: topics of thought

Any survey of ethnographic excursuses in Roman literature reveals a high
degree of overlap in the topics described, and the manner of their presentation. Standard topics include the following: mythic or historical origins, populousness, somatic features, warfare, clothing, conditions of living

(including eating and accommodation) social structure and political organ,

isation, religious practice,

gender relations and marriage. The recurrence

of these has been observed in a variety of specific and general studies 58
.

In the case of excursuses in historical works, there is every justification for

speaking of the ethnographic set piece. It is easy to see that a set number of such criteria engage a writer in discussing any given people, as if
in answer to a questionnaire. Broadly speaking, the questions recur even

though the order differs. While the term ‘questionnaire’ is used here in a
notional sense, there are important hints of its more concrete origins at an
early stage in the formation of classical ethnography. The Hippocratic Airs

waters places was written for a medical practitioner; in his travels he needed
to find out particular information about any place he reached before being

able to treat its inhabitants. This was based on the assumption that there

was an intrinsic relation of local conditions on the one hand and physiol-

ogy and psychology on the other 59 It is here, when the Hippocratic author
prescribes what geographic and human features the physician should seek
.

out, that we see an ethnographic questionnaire in its most concrete form.

This illustrates vividly what we find implied in later instances of the ethnographic tradition, one which is attuned to many of the same features and
tends also to assume a fixed relation of locality to human character. But
what were those criteria?
s8

On the continuity of historiographic tradition in this respect, e. g., Muller, Ethnographies vol.

I,

pp. 104—6; Comelii Taciti De Vita Agricolae, ed. R. M. Ogilvie and Sir Ian Richmond (Oxford:
59

Clarendon, 1967), p. 164, on Tacitus’ excursus on the Britons utAgr. 10-12.
Thomas, Herodotus in context.

India described

II. 1.

83

Indian pasts

Origins constitute one of the most persistent themes in ancient ethnography
generally

60

and a convenient point at which to begin surveying descrip-

,

tions of India. The main lines can be summarised as follows: Indians led an

uncouth, nomadic existence before being conquered in the military campaigns of Dionysus and Heracles, who brought with them the blessings of
civilisation

These two installed rulers, with whom India’s royal succession

61
.

began. On Dionysus’ departure from India, says Arrian, he appointed as

king Spatembas, ‘the most Bacchically inclined of his Companions ’. 62 He
ruled for fifty-two years, and was succeeded by his son Budyas for twenty,
and he in turn by his son Cradeuas. Heracles’ solitary daughter was to
become India’s only sovereign queen, ruling the Pandae in the area beyond

the Indus 63
.

For Arrian, Heracles is an indigenous figure even though he came to
India as a conqueror and civiliser: there are several versions of Heracles, and

Indians have a version that they call their own 64 In this way Arrian grafts
.

a Greek foundation myth onto Indian tradition. Heracles, like Dionysus,

thus makes it possible for Alexander’s troops to find their bearings in this
strange land, according to Arrian. In

reality,

however, these myths were

likely fabricated by Alexander’s own officers 65 By this reckoning, the same
.

deity supposedly existed in various, geographically distinct forms.
effect

One

of this perceived similarity of deities is to minimise the cultural

distance between India and the Greek world. Significantly, though, this

occurs at the very time the military narrative

is

predicated on a sense

of distance between them, and with that the magnitude of Alexander’s

achievement

66
.

Pliny, moving his focus westwards from the Ganges to the Indus Valley,

offers an explicit localisation of Dionysus:

Furthermore, people generally include in India the city of Nysa and mount Merus,
which is sacred to father Bacchus, for this is the source of the tale that he was born
60

Triidinger, Ethnographic, esp. 130—1, laid the groundwork for much subsequent work on this topic;
cfi,

61

62

more recently, Lund, Germanenbild, and Hartog, Memories of Odysseus.

The same is implied, for example, in Tacitus’ vague report of the story that Hercules had visited
Germany {Germ. 2).
tgov exalpcov eva tov pocKycobecrraTOV, 8.1.

63

Pliny

HN 6.76.

64 Trap’ auTotcnv ’IvSoTai
yriyevEa Agyeo-Qai, Ind. 8.4. It is clear from Herodotus 2.43 and Arrian,

Anab. 2.16.4, both of them discussing native Egyptian forms of Heracles, that he was seen as a
multiple rather than single figure. Arrian applies this same principle to Dionysus.
65

66

See Chapter 1, section II. 1 above.

For a comparable case of the surprising similarity of cultures, see Philostr. VA 3.12, at the point when

Apollonius is recognised by name and addressed in Greek by the messenger of the wise men.

3

Features ofa discourse

84

from Jupiter’s thigh; and likewise the Aspagani, a people abundant in vines, laurel
S/
trees and all fruit that grows in Greece. (6. 79)
In this way, Pliny ends his description of India as it began (6.61), by referring to the theme that runs through it: Alexander’s expedition. In particular,

the flora mentioned in this passage effectively connect India with the

Mediterranean.

most obvious aspect, there is no difficulty in making sense

In their

of such stories. Arrian gives a clear hint of what is at stake, though his

comment does contain a mark of caution: he suggests it is part of the GrecoMacedonian rhetoric of empire, a ‘boast’. 68 This ‘mythmaking’ seems to
have had its roots in the propaganda circulating at the time of Alexander’s
conquests. 69 Both Heracles and Dionysus were important to Alexander’s
self-presentation as a culture-hero; both were famous for their exploits at the
very fringes of the oikoumene. Heracles was otherwise more often linked
with the far western Mediterranean, such as the island of Erytheia, the

abode of Geryon; 70 at the very western end of the Mediterranean stood
the Pillars of Heracles. Dionysus, on the other hand, whose own origins
are usually thought to be Thracian, was specifically linked with the eastern

Mediterranean and with Asia as far as India. Dionysus was one of the most
frequently depicted deities, and his triumphal return from India was a
favourite motif on Roman sarcophagi. 71 Dionysus’ connection with India
is

suggested first in Euripides’ Bacchae 72 but only much later, by the time
;

the story had been strongly tinged by the Alexander narrative, was this part

of the Dionysus myth to receive its fullest expression, in Nonnus’ lengthy
Dionysiaca 7
.

It is

one thing to identify the specific Alexandrian or late-antique context

for the Heracles and Dionysus stories. But, more importantly for present

purposes, what do they tell us about Greco-Roman ideas concerning India’s

67

nec non et Nysam urbem plerique Indiae adscribunt montemque Merum, Libero Patri sacrum, unde
origo fabulae, Iouis femine edition; item Aspaganos gentem, uitis et lauri et buxi pomorumque omnium

in Graecia nascentium fertilem.
68

69

McckeSovikov Sokeei |ioi ti Koinracjna (Ind.

5.10),

where the last word quoted has a decidedly

negative edge. It is usually used in the plural, with the same effect: e.g. Ar. Ran. 940.
Alexander and the East (Oxford: Clarendon, 1996), esp. ch. 4, ‘The creation of belief.’ On origins as
retrojection, more generally, see Edward W. Said, Beginnings: intention and method

,

2nd edn (New

York: Basic, 1997).
70

Galinsky, Herakles theme. Among his labours, the girdle of the Amazon, Cerberus and the apples of

the Hesperides were the others specifically to involve the edges of the earth.
71

Discussed in Chapter 3, section 1.2.

72

James Diggle, Euripidea: collected essays (Oxford: Clarendon, 1994), pp. 444-53.
Bowersock, ‘Dionysus’, in Hopkinson, Studies pp. 156-66; cf. his Hellenism in late antiquity (Ann

73

,

Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1990).

,

India described
past?

85

On the one hand, they do give India a certain historical depth: Pliny

mentions that Indian history entails 153 kings over 6,451 years and 3 months,
to count from Dionysus to Alexander (6.59). This number is of course sus-

piciously high

and precise; but then Pliny’s comment about these and

other numbers suggests a note of caution on his own part. The number

of India’s kings is the measure of its antiquity. At one level this invites

comparison with Herodotus’ Egypt, of which it is possible to say the same
thing. 74

On the other hand, there is a very different principle at work

here: the use

of Dionysus as a defining point of Indian history has the

effect of predicating India’s past on that of the Greek world; of implying,
in effect, that Greece is more ancient than India. If we were to compare
this

comment with the time-depth accorded other eastern societies, it is

curiously hesitant. In Pliny’s India there is nothing to match, for example, the story of Psammetichos’

of Phrygians and Egyptians

experiment to test the relative antiquity

(2.2)

or the extended narrative supposedly

based on the priests’ king-lists, dominating the second part of the book.

Within the discourse of cultural priority, Indian history is abbreviated
in a way that brings credit to the Greeks.

Consequently it would be no

exaggeration to detect the tone of imperial conquest in the tales about

Heracles and Dionysus as bringers of civilisation. The version of ethno-

graphic time we see here is what Johannes Fabian has called the ‘denial of
coevalness’. 75

Whereas literacy and urbanism are central to Greek and Roman descriptions of eastern lands, especially Egypt, those criteria are scarcely visible in

Roman Indography. The best explanation for this relative absence involves
a return to the Achaemenid empire, emphasised in the first chapter. There
is

no reason to suppose that Persian accounts of India were particularly con-

cerned with its antiquity. This is, admittedly, an argument from silence, but
it

does explain Herodotus’ lack of comment on the subject. While it is true

that the urban settlements of Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro were only a few

centuries younger than Mesopotamian civilisation, that relative chronology

does not appear to be reflected in Persian sources. And if Hellenistic Greeks

74

Egyptian kings as an index of that land’s antiquity: Vasunia, Gift of the Nile ch. 3; Stadter, Arrian,
pp. 116-17, makes the comparison between India and Egypt here. And cf. Philostr.

75

VA 2.19.
Time and the Other: how anthropology makes its object (New York: Columbia University Press, 1983);
Gift of the Nile, pp. 110—35. One ma y compare here Walter D. Mignolo’s comments, in
New World context, about ‘literacy and the colonization of memory: writing history of people
without history:’ The darker side ofthe Renaissance: literacy, territoriality and colonization (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1995), pp. 127—35. The notion that colonialism determines who does
and who does not ‘have history’ was memorably expressed by Eric R. Wolf, in Europe and the people
cf. Vasunia,

a

without history (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982).

Features ofa discourse

86

and subsequendy Romans were heir to a basically Achaemenid image of
India, it stands to reason that antiquity will not have been a major feature.
Certainly the myths of Heracles and Dionysus appear to be later, postHerodotean additions. There is every reason to sense, with Bosworth, that
they formed part of Alexander’s self-presentation.
If Greek and Roman views of India’s past had a military context, then it
is

also true that the subject of warfare involves some degree of contradic-

tion, within Strabo’s Geography alone. At one point he claims that Indians

C686)/ 6 yet elsewhere that they are well behaved
when at war (15. 1.53 C709). Before Alexander’s campaign, he says, Indiare unwarlike (15.1.6

ans had neither suffered invasion nor dispatched an invading army. Arrian
says that the Indians had not even been attacked, barring two unsuccessful

attempts; 77 but later he speaks of the Indians’ war equipment. Diodorus,

while discussing India’s fertility, says that agricultural workers are left undis-

turbed even if hostilities take place in their immediate proximity; this
diverges from the normal practice whereby enemies destroy land (2.36.6—
7).

The contradiction implicit here suggests that both Strabo and Arrian

were using a variety of sources, or that the sources they were using, such as
Megasthenes, were themselves compilations of diverse information. On the
face of it, this would seem like a prime case of Nissen’s law.

78

Lying behind

the assertion of peacefulness, however directly contradicted elsewhere, is a
certain idealisation: the point is less an absence of war in itself than the ideal,

so central to Aristotle’s Politics, of auTapKsia (self-sufficiency). 79 Some of
this subject matter will return in the discussion of utopianism below.

I1 2. Profusion
.

The next topic to consider is India’s populousness. Diodorus speaks of £ 0 vr|
TtoAAd (2.38.1). The recurrence of this topic in various ancient Indographies, and something that continues to be remarked by travellers up to the

present day, suggests that it was part of the earliest descriptions.

80

This is

reflected in Pliny’s comment on ‘peoples and cities beyond number’, which
76

Cf. Arr. Ind. 5.4.

77 Ind.
5.5—7: ‘Sesostris the Egyptian’ and Semiramis the Assyrian queen. Both of these figures featured

prominently in the Greek romances: Giovanni Pettinato, Semiramide (Milan: Rusconi, 1985).
78

See e.g. Hornblower’s comment that Diodorus used one main source at a time’, in ‘Sources and
their uses’, CAH, 2nd edn. (1994), vol. VI, pp. 1-23 at 9; and cf. Brent D. Shaw, ‘The Elder Pliny’s

African geography’, Historia 30 (1981), 424-71.
79

For self-sufficiency as a goal in human associations, see e.g. Arist. Pol. I252b27-i253ai; cf. [Plato]
Def. 4i2b6. From the viewpoint of historical ecology, Peregrine Horden and Nicholas Purcell, The
corrupting sea: a study ofMediterranean history (Oxford: Blackwell, 2000), pp. 112-15, contrast this
goal with practice; cf, Chapter 6, section II. 1 below.

80

Compare Chapter 1, section II above.

,

India described

87

he notes with some exasperation while paying lip service to the goal of
81
systematic coverage. Arrian cites Megasthenes in saying that there are 118
eOvea, but he questions how Megasthenes could have known this, given
that he visited only a limited part of India,

and that various groups do

not necessarily mix with each other ( Ind 7.1). This suggests that Arrian,
like Pliny, was acutely aware of the link between descriptive numbers and
.

claims of grandeur. This talk about populousness is part of the discourse of

abundance and profusion that goes back to an early stage of Greco-Roman
ethnographic writing, and would prove especially persistent in the case of
India. This is sometimes connected with attention to India’s rivers (e.g.,

Diodorus 2.35.2).

On the strength of such passages, one scholar has claimed that India is, in
classical literature, a marvel of inner space, not outer.

8z

But this cannot be

upheld in view of other parts of the same descriptions: much is said in the
texts under consideration byway of outlining the organisation of outer space
as well.

For example, Arrian devotes the second and third chapters of his

Indica to describing the geographical shape of India, as if on a diagrammatic

map. 83 He is careful to define it in terms of borders: to its west is the Indus,
to its north Mount Taurus or Caucasus, to its south the Great Sea; about
the east there is no clarity.

84

Arrian’s approach here in outlining the shape of

India is typical of those writers who were familiar with the Greek tradition

of mathematical geography: pre-eminently Strabo and later Ptolemy, and
even to a lesser extent Pliny. This mathematical aspect is absent, however,

from Mela and the later Plinian tradition of Solinus and others. In this
respect it is helpful to invoke the distinction Strabo and Ptolemy make
between geography and chorography: the first is fundamentally on a global
scale, whereas the second is articulated in regional and more detailed maps

and tracts. 85

//.j.

Social divisions

Indian society consisted of groups, mere or genea. Diodorus and other Greek
sources present a seven-fold division, consisting of philosophers, farmers,

81

gentes urbesque innumerae, 6.58 (cf. 6.59).

82

Romm, Edges p. 83.

8?

Cf. even Curt. 8.9.2-3, as the brief start to a lengthy digression.

84

Alexander did not go beyond the Hyphasis, and therefore no good information about it exists
(cf Ind. 4.1 and 6.1). Some writers have ventured as far as the Ganges, and seen India’s largest city,
Palibothra. Pliny also (6.56-69) begins his section on India by describing its outer proportions.

85

On the distinction, see Claude Nicolet, Space, geography, andpolitics in the early Roman empire (Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1991), pp. 4, too and 171-2. Tellingly, this was an issue mostly
for the Greek tradition, which nurtured both, whereas the Latin tradition was much more largely
limited to chorography.

Features ofa discourse

88

shepherds, artisans, soldiers, overseers and councillors. On the other hand,
Pliny offers a different division of the 'more civilised’ Indians {mittores
populi, 6.66): cultivators, soldiers, long-distance traders, statesmen, wise

men and elephant-keepers. 86 The difference between the two lists, not
least the fact that they are listed in a different order, suggests that Diodorus

and Pliny have used divergent sources on this topic.
Indian sources, on the other hand, refer to a fourfold division of society. The famous Purusha-sukta (‘Hymn of man’), dated to around 500 bc,
recounts the creation of the world from the dismemberment of the primeval
giant Purusa ( Rig Veda 10.90.12). This is a key foundational text of ancient

Indian religion, but the social reality it constructs is considerably complicated by later texts. For example, the Arthashastra tells of eighteen different

kinds of high official (jnahamtras) including a chancellor ( samahrtr) and
,

treasurer ( samnidhatr).

8y

The purpose of mentioning this is to show that

further subdivisions were very likely.

How the many contradictions should be resolved is unclear, and this
is

not the place to make the attempt, especially since the fourfold Vedic

division mentioned above does not preclude the possibility of further subdivisions.

88

But it is not stretching a point to suggest that the key to under-

standing Diodorus’ division is Herodotus, who offers an identical analysis

of Egyptian society in the book of his Histories 99 The fact that Strabo
.

cites Herodotus explicitly (15.1.16 C691), though in a different connection,

makes such a comparison all the more plausible.
Greek and Roman Indography contains a number of explicit statements
that there were no slaves in India. Thus Diodorus:

86

(1) tellurem exercent, (2) miliriam alii capessunt, (3) merces alii suas euehunt, externas inuehunt, (4) res

publicas optumi ditissimique temperant, indicia reddunt, regibus adsident. (5) quintum genus, celebratae
ibi et prope in religionem uersae sapientiae deditum, uoluntaria semper morte uitam accenso prius rogo
finit. (6)

unum super haec estsemiferum ac plenum laboris inmensi

.

.

.

uenandi elephantos domandique.

‘One group works the land; a second hunts; a third exports and imports goods; a fourth, the most
eminent and wealthy, takes care of public administration, judges legal cases and constitutes the
kings advisors. A fifth group, dedicated to wisdom that is celebrated there and virtually regarded
as religion, always finishes their lives with suicide on a pyre that is lit in advance. Beyond these,
one group is half savage and fully engaged in the onerous task of hunting and taming elephants.’
It is striking to what extent suicide is a distinctive mark of the holy people, the fifth group
mentioned. Murphy, Pliny, 120—5, tellingly compares Pliny’s account of the suicide practised by the
Hyperboreans - at the far end of the orbis terrarum compared to the Indians — with an ‘early imperial
ideology of suicide’ (122).
87

Kautilya, The Arthashastra, tr. L. N. Rangarajan (Oxford University Press, 1992), p. 208.

88

Romila Thapar, Culturalpasts: essays in early Indian history (Oxford University Press, 2000), pp. 488512. For earlier attempts to make sense of the social structure implied here see Chapter 1, section
II. 2 above.

89

Hdt. 1.56, 101; 2.164

.

India described

89

Concerning the customs of the Indians which are unique to them, one may consider
that which was drawn up by their ancient sages to be the most remarkable; for
it has been decreed that under no circumstances shall anyone among them be a
slave, but that everyone shall be free and honour the equal status of all persons.
(2.39.5)

90

Here, what might otherwise have been presented in ethnographic rhetoric
as an absence, or as a cultural deficit,

91

is

listed as a positive attribute: the

lack of slavery. Many scholars have taken this to be an idealising note. 92

The moralistic tone of Diodorus’ comment makes clear that this is, from
his point of view, something positive, in other words, that he is exercising

the most positive connotations of the polyvalent adjective 0aupdcnos.

The strangeness of this passage comes into full relief when it is realised
that slavery is seldom presented in such abstract terms, as an institution; it

much more common for ancient writers to talk about slaves as individuals
or groups. 93 Two passages in Philo may be the key to understanding the
sentiment expressed: Every good man is free 79 and On the contemplative life
is

jo, concerning the Essenes and Therapeutae respectively. 94 In evidence, in

both cases, are groups who are viewed en bloc as philosophers. The passages
in Philo make it clear that the absence of slaves is the hallmark of a nation

of philosophers; it seems that India too must be understood in this light,
as we shall discuss in detail in Chapter 6.

Beyond philosophers, India rates highly in another sphere of special
knowledge, namely the medical. Thus Indian doctors, unlike their Greek
counterparts, are able to cure snake-bites, says Arrian citing Nearchus as
his source ( Ind 15.11-12). As mentioned by Arrian, these doctors (it|Tpo()

are a subset of the philosophers. Since the seasons are so temperate, there
are few diseases, and hence little need for doctors. Strabo also speaks of

Indian medicine, at 15. 1.45 C706 and 15.1.60 C713, citing Nearchus and

Megasthenes.

The spectacular suicide of Calanus, as we have already seen, is one feature
that made him the Indian holy man par excellence in Greek and Roman

sources. In fact, to j udge from Josephus, suicide is the distinguishing mark of

90 vopipcov 8’ ovtcov irapa toTs ’Iv5oTs evicov s£r|AAay|i£VG0 V OauiiaaicoTaTov av tis T^ynaaiTo

to KaTaSeiyOev Otto tcov apycacov Trap’ outoTs (JhAocto^cov vEvopo0ETr|Tai yap Trap’ avTois
8oOAov pev pr)56va elvai to Trapdnav, EAeuOgpous 8’ UTrapyovTas tt)v iaoTTiTa Tipav ev iraai.
91

See below in this chapter.

92

Thapar, Cultural pasts

,

p. 510, stresses that

Helots in Spartan society are the particular point of

comparison here, and that such statements should be understood in a generalised way.

Thomas Wiedemann, Greek and Roman slavery (London: Routledge, 1981).
94 The comparison is made by P. D. A. Garnsey, Ideas
of slavery in antiquity (Cambridge University
93

Press, 1998), p. 78.

Features ofa discourse

90

a more generalised use of ‘Calani’. 95 Its importance to the Indian philoso-

phers merits detailed discussion in Chapter 6 below, where the holiness

they represent emerges as a distinctively male affair. But in this survey of

Indography, it is important to examine a distinctively feminine context for
suicide, by which we may consider it to be very differently gendered. 96

II. 4.

If gender

Gender relations

was a staple of ethnographic visions beginning at least with

Herodotus, then India reveals some particular phenomena. 97 The custom
of sati, whereby the wives of a dead man voluntarily burn themselves on
his funeral pyre,

was first mentioned in Cicero among western sources

For Cicero in this passage, India per se is of less concern

{Tusc. 5.77-78).

than Rome itself. Though India is a barbarous country, it does show some

remarkable signs of virtue: its philosophers can endure the most trying
physical conditions, and its women compete with one another in showing
loyalty to their deceased husbands.

98

He invokes Spartans and Egyptians

also in this passage. The larger question in the book is whether virtue is

enough for the happy life; specifically in this passage, the point is that to
feel

pain must always be natural. 99 The important feature about Cicero’s

reference to sati then, is that it furnishes the rhetorical material of proof,
,

as part of a larger argument to which it is only tangentially linked. In terms

of the distinction made at the start of this chapter, this is a classic case of a
passing reference to India made within a different context.

By the same token, when Propertius speaks about sati he too projects
virtues onto a distant place, away from morally decayed Rome to chaste
India.

The poem reveals much about why India should have interested

Propertius:

There is a uniquely felicitous custom of funerals among eastern husbands, whom
the red dawn tinges with her own horses. For when the last torch has been thrown

95

Joseph. Ap. 1. 179; cf. Chapter i, section II and Chapter 6, section III.

96

The topos is documented in W. Heckel and J. Yardley, ‘Roman writers and the Indian practice of
suttee’, Philol. 125 (1981), 305-11. The practice lives on in India today.
E.g. Triidinger, Ethnographic, pp. 13, 25; Balsdon, Romans and aliens pp. 234-5.

97

,

98

Plut. Mor.

499C, in his essay ‘Can vice cause unhappiness’, also stresses that the element of com-

petition between the widows, before proceeding to the male equivalent of the virtuous death: the

suicide of the Indian philosophers {sop hot) while still healthy.
99 Earlier, at
2.40, India is also

mentioned by way of an example to illustrate the point that people

can be trained to endure pain. The baldness of Cicero’s comment - uri se patiuntur Indi — shows
that the story to which it refers, namely the suicide of Calanus, is readily understood, and needs no

explanation.

India described

9i

onto the funeral pyre, the dutiful crowd of widows stands with flowing hair, and
hold a deadly competition as to which of them will, living, follow her husband: it
is

a source of shame not to have had the chance to die

.

.

.

But we have a faithless

race of brides, and among us no girl will be a faithful Evadne or a devout Penelope.
(3.13.15-20, 23-24)

100

On the one hand, the passage quoted offers a line of thought familiar from
Cicero: faithful Indian women are contrasted with venal Roman women,

and there is an implied contrast also between the marital status of the
Indian wives and the learned young women ( doctae puellae) represented
by Cynthia, although she is not named in this poem. 101 On this account
Indian sati is the hypertrophe of idealised female fidelity. However, such an
analysis is complicated by any consideration of the Propertian corpus, or

even of the elegy itself. It begins with a harangue about how Roman women

have become corrupted by luxuries from the east, in a tone reminiscent of
the elder Pliny.

102

Propertius moves from this to a general attack on the

decline of religion and the rise of corrupting luxury in Rome. In several of
Propertius’ poems silk is emblematic of luxury, with all its attendant moral

dangers. 103 The irony of poem 3.13 is that within its complex movement

the east is seen both as the origin of morally corrupting luxuries and as the
place of the most desirable Roman fides.

10 *

Even if this poem is yet another case of Propertius’ intellectual adventurousness, an important point remains: the ostensible focus on India cloaks
a concern with morality, a concern firmly centred on Rome itself. By this

100

felix Eois lex funeris una maritis,

quos Aurora suis rubra colorat equis!

namque ubi mortifero iactast fax ultima lecto
uxorum fusis stat pia turba comis

,

,

et certamen habent leti, quae uiua sequatur

coniugium: pudor est non licuisse mori.

.

.

.

hoc genus infidum nuptarum, hie nulla puella
nec fida Euadne nec pia Penelope.
101

The thought underlying Indian polygamy can be understood with reference to Germ. 17, where
Tacitus describes the Germans as being Virtually the only foreign people to be content with one
wife apiece’.

102

See farther Chapter 4, section II.

103

See Jasper Griffin, ‘Augustan poetry and the life of luxury’, Latin poets and Roman life (Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1986), pp. 1 — 31. That silk in elegy comes from Cos rather than
the east is not an issue here, given that the east is very specifically linked with luxury goods in
the first four couplets: thus Indian gold (line 5), shells from the Red Sea (6), dyes from Tyre (7),

and aromatics from Arabia (8). Also, it must be admitted that the practice of sati alluded to in the
quotation does not explicitly mention India, but in practice there can be no question about this
identification.
104

An added complication within the poem is that the ideal of female virtue is identified with two
heroines of Greek mythology, Evadne and Penelope.

Features ofa discourse

92

reckoning Propertius’ India, like Cicero’s, constitutes very much the mirror

of Rome. 105 Furthermore, it well illustrates the contradictions implicit in

what might be called, by an umbrella term, a single ethnographic discourse.

Though Cicero is writing a philosophical treatise, and Propertius an elegy,
the use they both make of India is reminiscent of the rhetorical schools,
where exempla would be used to add force to a point. 106 It is no accident
that luxury is such a major theme in Curtius Rufus’ excursus on India,

given that his work too has been shown to owe much to the rhetorical
tradition of declamation: luxury was one of the topics to recur in rhetorical
exercises, and India provided an obvious pretext.

There is a hint of moral language in Arrian’s preliminary description
of Indians, narrated at the point when Alexander and his troops reached
the Indus. According to Arrian, new reports came back to the effect that
the Indians had no gold and were ‘in no way extravagant in their way of
life’

(5. 4.4).

107

The comment about their lacking gold seems to be revi-

sionist in its tone, and this is not surprising in view of passages referring

to gold dust.

108

Curtius makes pointed reference to the luxurious living of

the Indians, especially their kings (8.9), and this may be the kind of refer-

ence Arrian had in mind. Also, Pliny, in describing Taprobane (6.79-91),

complains that the island is beset with vices, despite its remoteness:
But not even Taprobane, though consigned by nature outside the world, lacks
our vices: there too gold and silver have commercial value, marble is considered
similar to tortoise-shell, and pearls and gems have high prestige. Their entire mass
of luxury is greater than ours. (6.89) 109

Negative though the tone of these comments may be, Pliny nonetheless
proceeds directly to a list of features which single Taprobane out for a higher

moral status, for Romans surpass the Sri Lankans in their use of wealth: its
people have no slaves, they do not sleep into the daytime, their houses are

moderate and low in height, they have no litigation, they worship Hercules
and they choose their king on the basis of merit and childlessness.
Pliny distinguishes luxury goods and their use, separating origin and
consumption, with the result that, by turns, he casts aspersions on both

105

The use of this concept is borrowed from Hartog, Mirror ofHerodotus.

106

Cf. L Inde , ed. Andr6 and Filliozat, for comparable cases in the declamations of the elder Seneca

and Pseudo-Quintilian. The exempla encapsulate moral ideals: H. I. Marrou, A history ofeducation
in antiquity (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1956), p. 235.
107

fjKiaTa x^iScovTas Kcrra rqv SiaiTav.

109

sed ne Taprobane quidem, quamuis extra orbem a natura relagata, nostris uitiis caret: aurum argentum

108

Strabo 15. 1.47 C707 and 15.1.69 C718.

et ibi in pretio, marmor testudinis simile, margaritae gemmaeque in honore; multo praestantior est totus

luxuriae nostra cumulus.

India described

93

Sri Lankans and Romans. Both deserve criticism, by Pliny’s way of thinking,

by their association with such commodities. But in the process a contradiction arises. Such contradictions arise when ethnographic discourse turns
precipitously towards its own society, to be held up as a mirror. 110

7/.y. Space and race
Indographers reveal some interest in somatic features. In some cases,
Ethiopians, the original ‘burnt-faces’, arise by way of comparison. Prox-

imity to the sun, greater in the south than the north, accounts for this and
also for woolly hair.

111

Pliny presents this phenomenon as a variable factor

within India: the faces of those living south of the Ganges are especially
burnt, yet even they are not as black as the Ethiopians (6.70). The closer
to the Indus they live, he says, switching from the one major river to the
other, the darker their skin-colour (also 6.70). Arrian too presents a grada-

tion between north and south ( Ind 6.9). The linen they wear is brighter
.

than any other, or else the darkness of their skins makes it seem brighter
(16.1). But skin-colour is not the only somatic feature mentioned by

Roman

writers: Strabo speaks of a predilection for dyeing beards and hair (15. 1.30

C699);

111

Arrian’s Indians are lean, tall and light in their movement (6. 17).

113

Do the features described here merit the label of race? The working definition of race used here is of the ‘essentialising of groups of people which
are held then to display inherent, persistent or predictive characteristics,

and which thus had a biological or quasi-biological basis’." 4 Certainly, it is
clear from the texts above that Pliny, Arrian and others identified Indians
in terms of a particular somatic profile, one that emphasized darkness of
skin-colour. What is less clear is the significance of these somatic features

within the broader picture of Indography. Indeed, it is one thing to point
to the existence of somatic difference in Roman thinking, and it is another

to explore the social

110

meanings of such difference. Taken together with

On the gendered vision of India in seventeenth-century Britain, see Kate Teltscher, India inscribed:
European and British writing on India, 1600—1800 (Oxford University Press, 1995), pp. 37-73.

111

Dihle, ‘Der fruchtbare Osten’, in Antike

und Orient (1984); Schneider, L’fethiopie et l’lnde,

PP- 88-95.
112
113

Arr. Ind. 16.4, following Nearchus.

In Chapter 6 section II. 2 we shall see the emphasis placed on the characteristic beards and esp.
,

gestures of Indian holy men.
114

Peter Robb, ‘South Asia and the concept of race’, in The concept of race in South Asia, ed. Peter

Robb (Oxford University Press, 1995), p. 1; cf. Mark Harrison, Climates and constitutions (Oxford
University Press, 1999), p. 12. On the relation of race and ethnicity in studying Mediterranean
antiquity, see Denise Eileen McCoskey, ‘By any other name? Ethnicity and the study of ancient
identity’, Classical Bulletin 79 (2003), 93-109.

Features ofa discourse

94

the visual representations of these features, such passages are few and far

between, in their extent far outweighed by passages emphasising the social
life of Indians.

Indography offers nothing to match Aeschylus’ linking of

black skins, death and sexual desire in the Suppliants ." 5

A further problem

concerns the ‘biological basis’ of these somatic references. Generally speaking, the idea of environmental determinism, articulated in the Hippocratic

Airs waters places, was well known in the world of Pliny and Arrian, and
this could, in principle,

provide a framework for comprehending distant

India. It is not clear, however, whether or to what extent this framework
was actually applied to India (on which, more below). In sum, then, race is

indeed an issue in passages such as those mentioned. Yet, equally, it is clear
that Roman Indography dwelled far more on cultural rather than somatic
features of identity, and this would suggest the predominance of an ethnic

over a racial vision of India.

II.

116

6 Catalogue or system?
.

The features sketched above, taken together, bear testimony to the organisational power of the ethnographic questionnaire, as described by Triidinger
and Muller - one form of the intellectual activity that Mark Twain called
‘hanging tags’. Yet, in two important respects they fail to do justice to
descriptions of India: plants and especially animals serve to mark India
117
as a region; by virtue of its rivers, too, India is distinctive.
The link of
place and people in ancient ethnographic thought cautions us to bear these

topographic criteria in mind alongside the purely ethnographic.
Arrian’s only mention of snakes is at Indica 15.11, in the context of Indian

medicine: unlike the Greek doctors, the Indians had a cure for snakebite,
so much so that ocjoi lr|TpiKT]v croct>cbTcrroi were assembled by Alexan-

der for consultation in case of such an emergency. These doctors are thus

presented as a case of specialised local knowledge. Elsewhere too snakes
receive some degree of attention."

8

At 15.2.7 C723, Strabo speaks of them

115

Vasunia, Gift of the Nile, pp. 47—53.

116

An underlying problem in identifying racial difference in antiquity may be articulated as another
question:

what is at stake in identifying somatic difference herd? Such a question might help

transcend the polarised terms of debate around race in antiquity, e.g., Frank M. Snowden, Jr,
‘Bernals “Blacks” and the Afrocentrists’, in Black Athena revisited, ed. Mary R. Lefkowitz and Guy
MacLean Rogers (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1996), pp. 112-28; and Martin
Bernal, Black Athena writes back (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002), pp. 66—9.
117

In fairness, though, it should be remembered that Trtidinger’s work focuses on ethnography, at

the expense (for example here) of geographical questions. In this chapter I interpret ethnography
a little more broadly, so as to capture the link between people and place that is very

Indography.
118

Strabo 15.1.28, 45 (Onescritus and Aristobulos).

much part of

India described
as one of the soldiers’ greatest fears.

119

95

Such passages suggest that fear itself

played some part in Alexander’s campaign. Uniquely, Philostratus’ India
is

beset

idea.

by dragons, which may be a novelistic expansion of the same

120

Whereas animals and plants underline the similarities between India
and Africa generally, rivers suggest comparison with Egypt in particular.
Certainly, rivers feature large in descriptions of India. They have already

been considered in the context of Alexander history as borders of knowledge.

121

Diodorus mentions first the Ganges: this is the largest in size and

in number of elephants, so much so that Alexander’s troops took fright and

mutinied once they had reached that point. It is worth noting, in passing,
the misconception that Alexander did in fact arrive at the Ganges with his
entire army, following his conquest of the other Indian peoples:

For when he had reached the river Ganges with his entire army, having subdued
the rest of the Indians

122
.

.

.

(2.37. 3)

In fact, Alexander’s expedition did not reach the Ganges but turned back
at the River Hyphasis or Hypanis. At all events,

Diodorus continues by

describing the Indus and its main tributaries, the Hypanis, the Hydaspes

and the Acesinus, then the multitude of other rivers (2.37.5).
Taken as a whole, the ethnographic profile of India to emerge here
presents a potential problem of interpretation: is there any contradiction in
the coexistence in the same texts of well-organised social groupings on the
one hand and marvellous creatures on the other? In other words, how are we
to reconcile the India of Breloer and Timmer with that of Wittkower and

Romm? If we are to judge from the one complete Indography that exists,
namely Arrian’s Indica, it appears that there was no such contradiction in
the minds of Greco-Roman authors. Arrian is concerned with the accuracy
of his information, it is true, yet this does not preclude his own inclusion
of marvels.

123

This

reflects a variegated picture

of India, one in which

phenomena are wilder the farther out you move. Such an analysis is of
some help, in a general way: for all its limitations in modern studies, the
model of centre and periphery does reflect something of ancient spatial
thinking. The idea is implicit in the overall geography sketched by Arrian

= Clitarchus F18.

120

119

Cf. Diod. 17.90

121

Strabo 15. 1.27 C697-698; Arr. Ind. 4.1 and 6.1 on the Hyphasis. Cf. Dihle, ‘Conception’, on the

Philostr.

VA 3.6-8.

significance of rivers in Indography.
122

kcct ocvTT) ct as yap eiri tov T ayyr|v TroTapov peTa uaor^s Tf\s Suvapscos, Kai tous aAAous ’IvSous

KonraTToAgpriaas.
123

At the very point at which Arrian says he will not be tempted into talking about India beyond the
Hyphasis, he mentions the story of the river Silas, in which nothing can float (6.1-3, following
Megasthenes).

Features ofa discourse

96

at the beginning of his Indica

,

and corresponds to other ethnographic texts.

The same feature can be found in both the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea
and in Tacitus’ Germania the differences between these two texts suggests
how deep the feature lies in ethnographic thought.
To end this section, it is as well to return to the ancient theory men;

tioned at its start. The Hippocratic notion of environmental determinism,
seen most obviously in Airs waters places

,

is

common currency in ancient

ethnographic texts. Those describing India are no exception. Yet there is

an important caveat to bear in mind here: though the overall system thus
described makes provision for India, the region itself is not explicitly men-

tioned in the work. The farthest east the Hippocratic text goes is Lake

Maeotis (17); India is thus, strictly speaking, off the map. Thus Arrian says
that the ‘Indians suffer few diseases, because the seasons are temperate’
{Ind. 15. 12).

124

This theory is less important in itself than in relation to the concept
of nature as it emerges in several of our texts. We should not forget that
Stoicism, even if merely a loose version, left its mark on Aelian and Pliny.

Arrian too came from a Stoic milieu, even if its philosophical system did

not affect him particularly strongly. With Pliny, however, we are on a firmer
footing. At a key point in his seventh book he says that ‘nature produced all

such things, games to itself but marvels to us’ (7. 32). 125 Casual though such a

remark may seem, its placing is important: within his anthropological book
there is a passage on strange human phenomena, in which India makes a

second major appearance in his work. Whereas books 3 to 6 offered a
chorographical conspectus of the world, including India, this seventh book
effectively offers a precis of the description of India. It is tempting to assert

that this different context emphasises what India really means to Pliny,

and indeed to several Roman writers: a place of marvels, both human and
animal, which redound to the glory of nature.
Implicit in this catalogue is a working definition of ethnicity as defined
from outside: the questions informing the ‘questionnaire’ are the effective
criteria of ethnic identity. But,

it

must be remembered, this is the ethnic

identity of a distant people, and it is one that is etically attributed rather

than emically claimed. Such names do not necessarily reflect the practices

of the people described. 126 Given the radical otherness of Indians,

it

is

unclear what purpose is served by invoking the terms of ethnicity at all. If
124
125

126

ou ttoAAcx 6e ev ’IvSoTai na0Ea yivETai, oti ai copai auppETpoi eujiv auToOi.
haec atque talia ex hominum genere ludibria sibi, nobis miracula, ingeniosa fecit natura.
Countless examples could be given of the tendency whereby a group of people is known by a name
conferred on them by their immediate neighbours. Sometimes this name is ‘loaded’, e.g., Tzvetan

India described

97

we are to understand ethnicity as an ongoing, complex negotiation between
ascribed and asserted identities,

127

then Roman sources leave us well short

of the goals of analysis. It is a telescopic vision. Vedic and other ancient
Sanskrit literature gives us considerable insight to Indian society of the first
five centuries

of the common era; but attempts to integrate Indian and

Greco-Roman accounts have met difficulties, if not outright resistance. 128
There is little we can know about what Indians thought about themselves
in relation to foreigners, or mlecchas, such as Romans and Greeks, and as

a result, a full-scale examination of ethnicity would be seriously hampered

from the outset. Certainly, the recent flood of scholarly attention to ancient
ethnic identities offers many insights to the present project: foremost among
these is the insistence that ethnicity should be perceived in an aggregative

manner, involving a set range of criteria, variously combined. 129 But this
only helps us so far and no further, since the current project does not
focus on groups of people within the Mediterranean, but one far removed
from it. Consequently, the approach adopted here has been to restrict the
investigation largely to the Roman discourse about India.

III.

LITERARY FEATURES: MODES OF DESCRIPTION

At this point it is necessary to step back from the details of the texts
described and focus on the manner in which those descriptions are made.
This involves consideration of some of the literary tropes that occur in
Indographic texts. Important among them, and linked to the recurrent figure of profusion that is so central to this chapter, inclusion and omission are
a major issue for the writers under discussion. Thus an author occasionally
apologises for providing detailed description, or even for omission of the

same. Pliny’s programmatic comment about ‘following in the footsteps of
Alexander’ is significant (6.61), as a reaction to difficulties brought by the
scale of his project of describing the entire universe. 130 Clearly, the state-

ment cannot be taken literally, in view of the twists and turns of Alexander’s
Todorov, The conquest ofAmerica: the question ofthe other, tr. Richard Howard (New York: Harper

and Row, 1997), pp. 25-8.
127

Richard Jenkins, ‘Rethinking ethnicity: identity, categorization and power’, Ethnic and Racial Studies
17 (1994), 199-223, esp. 217-18;

cf.

Fredrik Barth’s editorial introduction to Ethnic groups and

boundaries (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982).
Romila Thapar, ‘Historical consciousness in early India’, in Culturalpasts (2000 [1995]), pp. 155-72,
on the tendency of colonial scholars, including William Jones, to present India as ‘ahistorical’.
129
Jonathan M. Hall, Ethnic identity in Greek antiquity (Cambridge University Press, 1997), and
Hellenicity: between ethnicity and culture (University of Chicago Press, 2002), emphasises perceived
linguistic differences within the Greek world.
128

130

Cf. Chapter 1, section II. 4.

Features ofa discourse

98

itinerary; rather it suggests that the figure of Alexander provided a structur-

ing principle. Marking-off devices, such as the adverb to indicate thus far’
(hactenus),

1}1

illustrate the way in which an ethnographic excursus can be

bracketed off. Much of what follows may be regarded as the use of a special

metalanguage by which ancient authors organised writing about foreign
peoples.

III. i.

The Periplus form

As a literary technique the periplus made it possible to describe large
expanses of coastline, and goes back to Hecataeus and other early Ionian
132
writers of prose
By the first century bc it had become a well-established
literary genre, as Pliny’s list of sources in book i shows. Among its many
.

advantages was its ability to bring the reader along as it proceeded in serial
fashion down a coastline. As such, it reflected the fact that sea-travel was

throughout antiquity the quickest and cheapest means of long-distance
travel and transportation. It was most commonly pursued in the form of

hugging a coastline, even though open-sea travel now appears more com-

mon than was earlier supposed

133
.

But the link between genre and travel

was to prove restrictive in the case of any land far from the Mediterranean:
it was not intended in the first instance to describe inland areas or open sea.
It was, however, well suited to any substantial body of water that provided,
in the form of its coastline, a major organising principle

134
.

As a literary form re-enacting the journey described, the periplus lies
behind the broader structure of chorography, going back to Greek history’s
Ionian origins and particularly to Hecataeus’ periegesis; even then, this feature is visible in the Odyssey and other early Greek epic 135 There is something
.

inevitable about this when the observer himself has done the travelling, or

131

Notably also at 6.220, concluding the five geographical books; cf. also, from that part of the Natural
history , 2.102; 3.1; 3.94; 4.68; 5.73; 6.84; 6.219.

132

On Hecataeus and the periplus form, cf. Chapter

133

A. J. Parker, Ancient shipwrecks of the Mediterranean and the Roman provinces (Oxford: Tempus

1,

section 1 2 above. Also, Lesley, Greek literature,
.

pp. 219-20, on the experiences of sea-travel underlying the literary form of the periplus.

reparatum, 1992); and Lionel Casson, Ships and seafaring in the ancient times (Austin: University of

Texas Press, 1994).
134

The Periplus of Hanno, Arrian’s early Periplus ofthe Black Sea and the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea
(which involves a certain amount of open sea, but in the special circumstances of the monsoon)

135

Jacoby has divided fragments of Hecataeus’ work by area: FGrH 1 frr. 37-359. The comparison with
Homer is of course only a limited one: the prose tradition differs crucially in its loss of the heroic

show that the Mediterranean had no absolute monopoly on the genre.

or romance elements. For Karl Meuli, the Odyssey reflects an earlier epic tradition about Jason and
the Argonauts: Odyssee und Argonautika. Untersuchungen zur griechischen Sagengeschichte und zum

Epos (Berlin: Weidmann, 1921).

.

India described
claims to have done so.

136

99

The periplus of Hanno begins in the third per-

son, but within the space of a few sentences adopts the first person (plural),
travelogue-style. 137

But by the time we get to Pliny the periplus is deeply
ingrained as a paradigm for chorography, so much so that the writer’s
own journey is no longer relevant. Earlier in Pliny’s lifetime ( c ad 43),

Pomponius Mela’s Chorographia had revealed the same principle in a different way. He uses third-person narration throughout the work, thereby

implying a travelling focaliser without explicitly creating the character of
a traveller. Mela brings his work to an end where the Atlantic meets the

Mediterranean, sealing it with a strong closural gesture that is also a kind
of homecoming ( nostos):
Farther along are the colony of Zilia, the river Zilia, and Ampelusia, namely
the point from which we began

[i.e.

1.26],

which turns here into our Strait [of

Gibraltar]: this is the terminus both of the present work and of the Atlantic coast.
(3.107)

138

Coming even later in the tradition, Pausanias is an extreme case in so far
as the journey itself may be detected in the text, even though the author
himself does not make the claim. 139 Of course, the fact that he confines
himself to mainland Greece, with its extensive coastline, makes such a

journey all the more practicable: and it has been suggested that all his
chorographic material could have been observed in person, with only the
historical sections deriving from written sources. Indeed a striking feature of

Pausanias is the way in which physical places and objects, such as statues,
serve for him as a pretext to launch into historical material, which may

include biography or the history of religious practice. This procedure in

geographic writing may be contrasted with Valerius Maximus’ Facta et dicta

136

E.g., Hecataeus, and Herodotus in Egypt, esp. 2.99.1. The veracity of Herodotus’ claims is strictly

irrelevant to the present discussion, pace Fehling, Herodotus , pp. 240-3, esp. 241).
137

‘The Carthaginians decided that Hanno should set sail

.

.

("ES o^e KapxTlSoviois

•

•

•)•

Principally

on grounds of language, Blomqvist has dated the work to the classical period rather than the
Hellenistic. He shows how it fits in with early periegetical literature, probably pre-400, linked with
the heyday of Greek colonisation in the Mediterranean and Black Sea; the genre was linked at first
with the practical tales of sailors and merchants, but later developed a literary character (esp. 55-6).
Contrast Romm, Edges pp. 19-20, who assumes a Hellenistic date for the Greek translation.
138
ultra est colonia et fluvius Gna et unde initium fecimus Ampelusia in nostrum iam fretum vergens
,

promunturium, operis huius atque Atlantici litoris terminus.
139

Jas Eisner, ‘Pausanias: a Greek pilgrim in the Roman world’, Past and Present 135 (1992), 3—29 has

shown how Pausanias constructs his own identity through his travels; yet it is still worth emphasising
that Pausanias appears more implicitly than explicitly in the work, and there is remarkably little
first-person narration compared with a modern travelogue. See Pausanias: travel and memory in

Roman Greece, ed. Susan E. Alcock, John F. Cherry and Ja£ Eisner (Cambridge University Press,
2001), esp. part 1.

IOO

Features ofa discourse

memorabilia-, here is also a catalogue of cultural phenomena, but one that
is

thematically rather than spatially organised.' 40

The periplus is thus one response, and a limited one at that, to a residual
problem of ethnographic writing: that of establishing order amid a variety of
material. Where to start, how to proceed, where to end? What to include
and what to leave out? These questions are not easily solved for writers

seeking to integrate new material into well-established genres. The periplus

was of limited use in describing India: the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea
does indeed make use of the form, but it is limited to the coastline, and
does little to go beyond the immediate and limited concerns of commercial
travellers. Let us consider some of the other tropes to arise in Indography.

III. 2.

Omission and abbreviation

Omission and its twin, inclusion, are recurrent themes in the metalanguage
of Indography. Pliny at various points of the Natural history consistently
speaks of omission as something to avoid.' 4 At the beginning of book 7
’

he says there are too many human mores to cover in detail, and much has
already been said in the preceding books; but some are ‘not to be overlooked’

{baud omittenda), particularly those further from the sea, and he knows
some will find these far-fetched (7.6). When Pliny concludes his section
on Sri Lanka by saying ‘These things have been established concerning Sri
Lanka’ ( haec conperta de Taprobane, 6.91), we may well wonder whether the
adjective for ‘all’ {omnia) should be understood as part of the sentence. At
all events, this is a

way by which Pliny marks the end of a description, so the

author can move to a different topic, in this case northeastern Iran. After
a lengthy digression on the sea-route between Egypt and India, Pliny reins

himself in with the comment, ‘we will return now to our theme’ (6. 106). 142

But essentially the nature of the encyclopaedia is such that digressions are
possible within the broader rubric of the subject under discussion. Pliny’s
paratactic style lends itself to inclusivity, at the expense of the critical use

of sources.

The following comment on the seven parallels as a system for dividing
up the world offers a comparandum, coming as it does after a different,
tri-continental system:

140

Nikolaus Thurn, ‘Der Aufbau der Exemplasammlung des Valerius Maximus’, Hermes 129 (2001),

-

79 94
141

-

Of Pliny’s thirty-one instances of omittendum the gerundive of obligation, the negative non or haut
,

is

142

used on each occasion: e.g., 4.93; 10.128; 11.239.

nunc revertemur ad propositum.

India described

IOI

To these, furthermore, we shall add another theory of Greek discovery exhibiting
the most recherche acuteness, so that nothing may be lacking in our survey of the
geography of the world. (6.211) 143
Pliny’s much-vaunted desire for comprehensiveness is one reason he pro-

ceeds with this passage; another is that he finds it intellectually impressive,
as he says emphatically, and he invites his reader to be equally impressed.

The following may be noted as a rare instance of Pliny’s admission to
having omitted something, on grounds of similarity to what is already
discussed:

There are many similar facts besides, which I take care to omit in my account of the
several kinds of birds, to avoid [the reader’s] aversion: for example, Theophrastus
states that doves, peacocks and ravens are not indigenous to Asia, nor are croaking

frogs to Cyrenaica. (10. 79) 144

Yet even here, where he claims to omit comparable stories concerning

unusual bird behaviour, he cannot resist mentioning a brief tale from
Theophrastus, so much so that the statement functions as something of a
praeteritio d 45

A notable Plinian praeteritio on the other hand, is the famous praise
of Italy, laus Italiae (3.38— 42). 146 He apologises for the brevity with which
,

he describes the peninsula, and particularly the city of Rome, the ‘world
capital’,

Roma terrarum caput (3.38). Italy he must pass over quickly for

the sake of his work as a whole, and it is for this reason that he begs his
readers’ forgiveness. 147

But in fact the praeteritio proceeds at a leisurely

pace, and in its course Pliny gives much attention to the beauty of Italy. It
is

the nurturing parent of all lands, it gathers, tames and civilises disparate

peoples:
I

am mindful that I may justly be thought ungrateful and apathetic if I describe so

casually and cursorily a land which is both the fosterling and the mother of all lands,

chosen by the providence of the gods to make heaven itself more glorious, to unite
scattered empires, to moderate manners, to assemble in converse through common

143

his addemus etiamnum unam Graeciae inventionis sententiam (scientiam pars coddj vel exquisitissimae
subtilitatis ut nihil desit in spectando terrarum situ.

144

multa praeterea similia, quae prudens subinde omitto in singulis generibus [avium], fastidio parcens,
quippe cum Theophrastus tradat invecticias esse in Asia etiam columbas et pavones et corvos et in
Cyrenaica vocales ranas.

145

Cf. 28.151, where he does not bother to list a remedy involving a particular animal since it has

become extinct; at 28.180 he passes over a certain kind of lichen because it is pernicious and not
medically useful.
146

On this passage compare Jacques Andr6, ‘La conception de l’fetat et de l’Empire dans la p6ns£e
gr£co-romaine des deux premiers sikles de notre £re\ ANRWW.^0.1 (1981), 3-73, at 57.

147

legentes tantum quaeso meminerint ad singula toto urbe edissertanda festinari (3.42).

Features ofa discourse

102

language the jarring and rude tongues of so many peoples, to give humankind
civilisation, and in short to become the single fatherland of all peoples throughout

the world. But what am I to do? The great distinction of all its places — and who

could touch on them all? - and the great renown of the various phenomena and
peoples detain me. (3. 40) 148

The two parts of the laus Italiae are Italy’s importance, resulting in part
from its central location in the Mediterranean, and its beauty. A list of
its

ideal features

is

given in breathless asyndeton. Saying this after the

rhetorical question, ‘But what am I to do?’ ( sed quid faciam?), Pliny here

feigns helplessness: though unable to go into the level of detail deserved,

he is compelled to mention the kinds of thing he could have described:
Such life-giving and enduring healthiness, such mildness of climate, such fertile
fields, such sunny hills, such safe pastures, such shady groves, such bountiful kinds
of forests, so many mountain breezes, such abundance of fruit, vines and olives.
(3-4i)

149

And so Pliny proceeds for the same length again. We may note the importance of a mild climate, again a sense of Aristotelian ‘middleness’ in this
150
The renown ( nobilitas) of Italy lies here in the qualities that
make it a locus amoenus, rather than in its marvels; 151 later on, in book 36,

context.

the marvels of Rome are mentioned in the context of architecture rather

148

nec ignoro ingrati ac segnis animi existimari posse merito si obiter atque in transcursu ad hunc modum

dicatur terra omnium terrarum alumna eadem et parens, numine deum electa quae caelum ipsum clarius
faceret, sparsa congregaret imperia ritusque molliret et tot populorum discordes ferasque linguas sermonis

commercio contraheret ad colloquia et humanitatem homini daret, breviterque una cunctarum gentium
in toto orbe patria fieret. (3.39) sed quid agam? tanta nobilitas omnium locorum, - quos quis attigerit?

- tanta rerum singularum populorumque claritas tenet.
149

150

iam vero tanta e vitalis ac perennis salubritas, talis caeli temperies, tarn fertiles campi, tarn aprici colies,
tarn innoxii saltus, tarn opaca nemora, tarn munifica silvarum genera, tot montium adflatus, tanta
frugum vitiumque et olearum fertilitas.
E.g., in the seventh book of the Politics (13271518-38) Aristotle reflects the widely current idea that
natural character (cf>uais) is determined by climate and locale. People inhabiting Europe and other
cold areas are plucky but lacking in intelligence and skill; as a result, though themselves living
relatively free, they are unable to rule and organise their neighbours. On the other hand (8e) Asians
are intelligent and skilful in temperament but lack spirit, so much so that they are always prone to
subjection and slavery. Occupying a middle position geographically (pecteuei), xhegenos of Hellenes
is both spirited and intelligent. As a result it is free and possessed of good political institutions, and
in fact capable of ruling all humanity if it attained political unity. It is clear, however, that Aristotle
takes the old connection between locale and character a step further, by exploring the political
implications of middleness, esp. ability to rule others. Geographical location and climate are thus a
rationale for the ‘natural’ Asian servility, ungrudgingly accepted, that Aristotle mentions elsewhere

(notably 1285a in the discussion of different types of kingship).
151

A counter-example is provided by Lucan’s description of ‘godforsaken’ Libya, 9.435: temperies uitalis
abest, et nulla sub ilia/ cura Iovis terra est. On the virtues of temperies see further Richard F. Thomas,
Lands and peoples in Roman poetry: the ethnographic tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge Philological
Society, 1982), pp. 11—12.

India described

103

than natural history narrowly defined. Like the praeteritiones in Cicero’s
speeches, matters supposedly omitted are in fact emphatically brought to

the reader’s or listener’s attention. 152 In this way, Italy and Rome receive
textual prominence, but in a different key compared with the marvels of

the edges of the earth. And it is for this reason that Pliny can, in fact must,
pass over the chance to give an Italian ethnography: 153 by virtue of its marvel

element, his ethnographic style is suited more for people of the edges of the
earth than for those of Italy. Yet even here we may detect the submerged

question of perspective in ethnography, Italy as perceived by the Greeks.

A small fraction of Italy was significant enough to merit the name Magna
Graecia from the Greeks, smug though they were: ‘the Greeks themselves,
a people hugely given to self-regard, have passed judgment on the land by

giving the name Great Greece to merely a small portion of it’ (3.42). 154 This

disarmingly candid reflection on Greek culture is in effect a reminder of
Pliny’s Hellenistic background, and of the degree to which he is conscious

of it.
Related to omission is abbreviation. Mela’s brief passage on India (3.6171)

shows what happens when such a description is abbreviated: within

individual items described, the marvel remains as the guiding principle,

but the critique of sources and its debate over truth and fiction are lost in
the process of compression. This is largely the fate of late-antique excerpts

such as we find in Solinus and Isidore: the marvellous elements continue,
while the debates around them have long since fallen by the wayside. The
reasons for this process are varied, whether the familiarity of the material,
the practical needs for concision, or the dynamics of transmission.

III. 3. Authors

and authority

A certain kind of authorial presence shines through the accounts of India.
It is

not autopsy in the direct sense that has been studied with regard

to Herodotus and Thucydides in Greek historiography. 155

Of the writers

described earlier in this chapter, only the anonymous author of the Periplus

152
153

154

Heinrich Lausberg, Handbuch der literarischen Rhetorik, 2nd edn (Munich: Beck, 1973), pp. 436-7.
neque ingenia ritusque ac viros et lingua manuque superatas commemoro gentes (3.42).
de ea iudicauere Grai, genus in gloriam suam effusissimum, quotam partem ex ea appellando
Graeciam Magnam (3.42). This adoption of a Greek perspective on Rome is in keeping with

ipsi

the Hellenistic framework of imperial geographies: Clarke, Between geography and history.

It is

interesting also to observe, on these lines, that the earliest Latin use of the word barbarus is of the

Romans themselves: Plautus, e.g. Cure. 150, Mil. 211, Mostell. 828. See further TLL II. 1735. 53-68
and 1740.40-58. This designation is articulated in Paulus Festus p. 36 Muller.
155

Clarke, ‘Author of Strabo’; cf. Schepens, Autopsie'.

104

Features ofa discourse

of the Erythraean Sea and Cosmas claim to have visited India, and then
those claims are muted. 156 It is significant that both of these two exceptions are traders. 157 Far more common, for the texts discussed here,

is

a

sense of authority implicit in literary sources cited, notably Onesicritus,

Megasthenes and Nearchus. As Chapter i showed, this may be considered
a kind of deflected autopsy, namely the phenomenon whereby texts based

on earlier autopsy carry special authority. Ctesias is a notable absence from
list: indeed, the fact that he never visited India is one of the main
grounds for his consistently negative reputation. 158 In this way, autopsy is

this

a key criterion for the ranking of sources.

A few instances will suffice to

prove the point.
Strabo tells us that Megasthenes saw tigers (15. 1.37 C703). But other

Nearchus by his own
account saw tiger skins only rather than the live animal (15.1), a remark
travellers were less fortunate. According to Arrian,

that is matched by his having seen the skins only of the gold-digging ants
brought into the Macedonian camp. 159 The point here is not the veracity

or otherwise of the original sources; rather, the extent to which autopsy
is

an issue for later authors. What the texts preserve is thus not autopsy

itself but the next best thing available: the sense that their sources have seen

phenomena first-hand. Such statements may be taken as a nod toward the
power of autopsy as a source of authority, the creation of a kind of autopsy
at one remove. It could well be that autopsy was so familiar by the time
of Strabo and Arrian that variations of the theme could be entertained to
similar effect. In Arrian, the phenomenon is doubly deferred: first, neither

a tiger not a gold-digging ant was seen: the skins of dead animals function
as witnesses. Secondly and more importantly, Indian objects were seen not

by the authors but their sources, by Nearchus rather than Arrian himself.

The ideal of autopsy may be hard to realise in the case of India, but it
remains within the purview of writers seeking to validate their accounts
with reference to authorities. In so far as autopsy was an issue for ancient
writers, its authority went unchallenged.

The theme of autopsy takes an unusual turn in Cosmas’ Christian topography. Given the stigma attached to the mercantile travel in antiquity, it
comes as something of a surprise that Cosmas confidently identifies himself
156

Pliny makes remarkably little of his own visits to those parts of the Mediterranean world that he

did in fact visit while on military duty.
157

On the Periplus author and on Cosmas, see section

158

Cf. Chapter i, section 1.4.

159

For a comparandum for this phenomenon in a work that is not easily dated, Hanno the Carthaginian
supposedly brought back from his African voyage skins of the ‘gorilla’: in both cases the hides are
tokens of proof.

I

above, Cosmas being a former trader.

India described

105

as a trader, especially when he has given up commercial travel in order to

become a monk. This he does explicitly at 2.54 and 2.56, and implicitly
at several points when

he speaks of his own travels. 160 What is more, in

describing the natural historical details of book 11, he evaluates most phe-

nomena in light of his own experience. Thus he has seen a giraffe and a
rhinoceros, both dead and alive. Of the hog-deer, he says bluntly that he

has not only seen but eaten it.

161

Here, in an adaptation of the usual theme,

human interaction with an unfamiliar phenomenon takes place through
162

Cosmas admits, on the other hand, that
he has seen neither a unicorn nor a hippopotamus, though he has seen
eating rather than merely sight.

and sold some of its large teeth. 163 Whereas autopsy is part of Cosmas’
description of India, a much greater source of authority looms over the
Christian topography, namely that of the Jewish and Christian Bibles. 164
While he does mention Christian missions to the Indian subcontinent, he
freely admits that they have not been entirely successful.

Not until much later, with the preface to al Biruni’s Indica from the
decades of the eleventh century, do we find an explicit attack on

first

autopsy in favour of oral sources and especially of written tradition. 165

From a certain point of view, al Biruni’s attack on autopsy, so prominently
made in that work, reveals the tenacity of the tradition against which he
argues. But already among Indographers of the Augustan age the dictates
of autopsy are broadly interpreted, and necessarily so in the case of distant
India.

III.4.

Utopianism and barbarism

Commodities coming from India inspired considerable moral comment in
Rome, as Chapter 4 will show. To what extent do Roman writers view India
generally through a moralising lens? There is a certain amount of moral

160

He identifies himself as a business traveller when referring to his companion as aKKov Eva TTpayHOTeuTfjv (2.56). Note also the use of the first person in the description of Adulis: ev0a Kai tt)V
EpTropiav TToioupsQa oi otto AAe^avSpEias Kai ccrro EAa euttopeuouevoi (2.54). Not only do we
hear of Cosmas the trader but also of other traders, Roman and Iranian; however, no Indian traders
are explicitly mentioned. See Chapter 4, section III.

161

tov 8e xoipe^a<l>ov Kai eT8ov Kai £<|>ayov.

162

On the importance of autopsy in classical Greek historiography, not least in Herodotus, see esp.
Schepens, Autopsie

163

’.

By the same token there is a vivid sense of place, namely Alexandria, as Cosmas’ base. This is
clearest in the first prologue to the work; when he says that he has sold hippopotamus’ teeth ‘here’

(svTaOQa), we may well understand him to mean Alexandria.
164

On Cosmas’ bibliocentrism see esp. Wolska, Topographie chretienne.

165

Alberuni’s India, ed. Edward C. Sachau (Delhi: D. K. Publications, 1910), pp. 3-4.

106

Features ofa discourse

comment, but nothing to match, say, the overtly anti-Egyptian sentiment
evidenced in Juvenal’s satire on Egyptian cannibalism ( Satire 15) 66 The
mime, P. Oxy. 413, is arguably unmatched in its negative view of Indians,
if we may draw that conclusion from their language and behaviour. It is
no accident that this is also the only Indographic text that is palpably of a
,'

lower social class than the rest. When, by contrast, Cicero underlines the
barbarity of India - ‘WEat savage land is more uncouth or unrefined than
India?’ - he does so in order to praise the courageousness of Indian sages

and widows. 167 It seems here that the rhetoric of barbarism and civilisation
is

employed not in its own right but as a rhetorical strategy, a means of

using India as a mirror whereby to contemplate Roman failings.
Equally, there are a number of references to Indian paideia, which, seen
in context, both prove and disprove the barbarity of India.'

68

Dio Chrysos-

tom’s 53rd discourse, on the subject of Homer, makes the intriguing state-

ment that Indians have translated Homer’s poetry into their native language
and perform it in that fashion:
It is
it

said that Homer’s poetry is sung even in India, where people have translated

into their own speech and tongue. (53.6)

169

Even though the people of India do not know the stars of our part of the
world, say Dio, they are acquainted with the sufferings of Priam, Hecuba

and Andromache, and the bravery of Achilles and Hector (53.7). In recounting praise for Homer on the part of the philosophers, Dio is in effect praising Homer himself in this discourse, not least his quality as a teacher. His

poems delight and instruct not merely Greek speakers, but are known (in
translation) even to those living far afield, who know nothing else of Greek
society. At issue for Dio is not India perse, but the greatest cultural capital of

the Greek world, the Homeric poems; India, by virtue of the considerable
distance it evokes, signifies the power of Homer, and ultimately of Greek

paideia itself. 170

Aelian {Var. hist. 12.48), who makes an interesting comparison with ‘Persians’, succinctly makes the same point:

1

66

167
168

E. Courtney, A Commentary on the Satires ofJuvenal (London: Athlone, 1980), pp. 590-1.
quae barbaria India uastior aut agrestior? (Tusc. 5.77-78).
Another indirect reference to India’s paideia is found at Curt. 8.9.15, where a certain tree-bark is

seen as useful for writing.
169

ottote Kai rrap’ ’lvSot$ <|>cccnv aheaOai t t\v Opfipou Troir)atv, psTafSaAoVTCov aurriv eis Tpv
CT(|>ETEpaV SidAEKTOV te Kai (|>COvf|V.

170

Froma I. Zeitlin, ’Visions and revisions of Homer’, in Being Greek under Rome: cultural identity, the
Second Sophistic and the development of empire, ed. Simon Goldhill (Cambridge University Press,
2001), pp. 195-266, esp. 203.

India described

107

The Indians rewrite the poems of Homer into their own language and recite them.
They are not alone, for the Persian kings do so as well, if we are to believe those
writing on these topics. 171
It is difficult to

know what to make out of this story: certainly, this asserts the

diffusion of what is perhaps the most revered of Hellenic cultural capitals,

namely Homer, and with it the breadth of the Greek cultural sphere. In
this respect, Philostratus’ Life ofApollonius ofTyana bears comparison. But

beyond that, analysis becomes harder, and we are left wondering whether
this reflects some consciousness, however distorted, of the Sanskrit epic
tradition represented by the Mahabharata and the Ramayana, so central to
Indian historical consciousness 172 Such a suggestion would carry greater
weight if it were substantiated elsewhere. At all events, what emerges in
these two passages is the sense that India’s spatial distance implies a priori
a cultural distance, and it reflects the magnitude of Homer’s achievement
that his poems bridge that distance.
But moral comment has another side too: again we come to the problem of utopianism 173 On the face of it, there is no denying the ideal.

.

ising force

of a passage such the following,

in

which Strabo draws on

Megasthenes:
All Indians eat simply, particularly while on campaign. They take no pleasure in
large mobs, and thus keep good order. They abstain for the most part from theft.

Megasthenes claims, at any rate, that while he was in the camp of Chandragupta,
though in an encampment of forty thousand he did not on any day see reports of
thefts worth more than two hundred drachmae - this among people who use only

unwritten laws. For, he says, they do not know writing, but manage all their affairs

from memory: they thrive on account of their simplicity and thrift. They drink
no wine except at sacrifices, and then their drink is made from rice rather than
barley. Their meals consist mainly of rice porridge. Their simplicity is attested also

in their laws and contracts, given that they are not litigious. They have no lawsuits
concerning mortgages or deposits, and have no need for witnesses or seals, but
trust their associates. Also, their leave they domestic property unguarded. (15. 1.53

C709) 174

171

oti ’lv8oi tt) Tiapa a<f>iaiv Eirixcopico <t>covfj tcx Opfipou pETaypayavTES aSouaiv ou povoi

aAAa Kai oi riepacov |3aaiAEis, ei ti xph ttioteueiv toTs uiTEp toutcov iaTOpoOorv.
172

On the role of epic tradition, see for example, Thapar, Cultural pasts pp. 195-212 and 647-79.

173

See Chapter 1, section III above.

,

174

EuteAeTs 5e Kcrra tt)v SiaiTav ’IvSol iravTES, paAAov 6’ev tocTs aTpocTEiais’ ouS’oxAgo ttepittco

Xaipouai, SiouEp EUKoapoOcn. ttAeiotti S’sKEyeipia TiEpi tccs kAottccs yEvopEvos yoOv ev tco Zav-

5 pokott ou CTTpaTOTTEbco <|>r|aiv 6 MEyaa0EVTis, TETTapaKovTa pupiaScov TTAf)0OUS ISpUpEVOU
prjSEpiav f)pEpav 18eTv dvqvEypEva KAsppaTa uAeiovcov f| SiaKoaicov Spaypcbv a£ia, aypd<J>ois

Kai Toah-a vopois xp^nevois. ou5e yap ypappaTa EiSsvai auTous, aAA’ crno pvripris EKaaTa
8ioiKEia0as- suit pay eTv 5’ opcoi 5ia tt)v carAoTTiTa Kai tt^v euteAeiov oTvov te yap ou ttiveiv

Features ofa discourse

108

A number of ethnographic themes are presented here in an idealising
manner: simplicity, frugality and self-restraint in their life-style generally,
not least in their diet; the avoidance of crime, at least serious crime; ignorance of writing; the consequent reliance on memory in their social interactions.

But Strabo’s idealisation is followed directly by some qualifiers

indicating disparagement.

Now Indian customs are contrasted with the

communal meals of Greek citizens, which are held up as the norm:
Such behaviour [i.e. described in the previous passage] is indeed self-controlled.
But nobody could commend their other practices, of always eating on their own
and of not having one standard hour for dinner and breakfast rather than eating
as each one pleases. For eating in the former manner better promotes social and
political life. (15. 1.53 Cyo^))
It

I7S

should be remembered here that the Athenian symposium and the

Spartan mess meal

( syssition ) were archetypes of social exchange in the
Greek world, at least among male citizens. 176 It is clear, then, that Strabo’s

idealisation is limited in scope, applying to some spheres of social life, but

not others. This alone may be regarded as an indication of the problem of
utopias: they do not stand up well to scrutiny; they are utopias in so far
as they are distant visions, and on closer inspection they quickly become

problematic.

Do the features of Strabo’s India qualify it for the status of a utopia? On
the one hand, there is no mistaking a tendency to idealise within various

kinds of ethnographic discourse. Two utopian texts of the early modern
period underline the connection between social ideal and distant place: the

main speaker of More’s Utopia, Raphael Hythlodaeus, supposedly accompanied Vespucci on his voyage to the New World. Tomaso Campanella’s
City of the sun has its geographical location in the Indian Ocean. Obvious

here are the ethnographic contexts of utopian thought, especially when a

utopian tradition is considered in a broader span. Yet, on the other hand, it

would be misleading to overemphasise these elements, and to assume that

aAA’ ev Oucriai povov, ttiveiv 8’ octt’ opu£r|s &vtI KpiOivcov cruvTi0evTas- Kai crma Se to ttAeov
opu^av elvai po<{>r|Tf)v. Kai ev toTs vopois 8e Kai auppoAaiois t^v aTrAoTpTa eAeyxeo-0ai Ik tou
[xi] ttoAuSikous eTvar oute yap UTro0fiK-ns oute TTapaKaTaOfiKris.elvai SiKas, ou8e papTUpcov
ou8e CTtfjpayiScov auTots 5e!v, aAAa ttictteueiv uapa|3aAAopevous- Kai toc oikoi Se to ttAeov

a<f>poupeTv.
175

TaC/Ta pev 8f] aco^poviKa, T&AAa 8’ oOk av tis 6aro8e^aiTO, to povous 8iaiTacr0ai aei Kai to
pf] piav elvai iraaiv obpav koivt^v Seittvou te Kai apiaTou, ocAA* ottcos EKaorco
TOV KOIVCOVIKOV Ka'l TOV TToAlTIKOV ^lOV EKEIVCOI KpelTTOV.

176

<j>i

Aov irpos yap

Sympotica: a symposium on the symposium ed. Oswyn Murray (Oxford: Clarendon, 1990); Nick
,

Fisher, ‘Drink, hybris

and the promotion of harmony in Sparta’, in Classical Sparta: techniques

behind her success, ed. Anton Powell (London: Routledge, 1989), pp. 26-50.

India described

109

every ethnography has its idealising side. Strabo’s India is, as we have seen,
a utopia up to a certain point only; and More’s and Campanella’s utopias
are far from being utopian in all respects.' 77

Moving away from India momentarily, it is hard to read Tacitus’
Germania without giving some weight to the glowing terms with which
he describes German libertas (esp. ch. 37). If this was a major concept in

Roman politics and social life,' 78 then Germany too is evaluated according
to this criterion, and presented in glowing terms. In describing the long
combat between Romans and Germans, Tacitus mentions that there have
been heavy losses on both sides, and this leads him to compare other nations
with whom Rome has fought:
Neither the Samnites, the Phoenicians, the Spaniards, the Gauls nor even the
Parthians have chastened us more frequently: the freedom of the Germans is more

dangerous than Arsaces’ monarchy. (37) 179

Ethnography, on these lines, carries the potential of social criticism of home.
That does not mean that lands and people described should constitute an
integrated utopia.

A recent account offers a four-part typology: retrospective utopias (e.g.,
Golden Age myths); utopias of discovery (e.g., Euhemerus’ Panchaia
and Iamboulos’ Islands of the Sun); utopias of foundation (e.g., Plato’s
Republic)-, and those of the inaccessible present (e.g., the Isles of the Blest
or the Hyperboreans). Faced with such categories, India’s utopian status is
at best tenuous. It is not retrospective, for India’s antiquity receives limited

recognition only; and India is too distantly located to be foundational.
Instead, Strabo’s description quoted above, particularly his emphasis on

Indian simplicity, resonates with the kind of utopia of the inaccessible
present found in the descriptions of the Aithiopians. l8 ° Yet, even in Strabo’s

account there is a much weaker utopian element than in, say, Diodorus
Siculus description of Aithiopians (3. 2.1-4).

From the above discussion it emerges that utopianism in this ethnographic context has its limits. Utopias, it appears, can have that status as
177

The definition of utopia discussed by Clay and Purvis, Four island utopias, p. 2, stresses that they
are not ‘models of unrealistic perfection’ but rather ‘alternatives to the familiar

.

.

.

norms by which

to judge existing societies’.
178

Chaim Wirzubski, Libertas as a political idea at Rome during the late Republic and early Principate
(Cambridge University Press, 1950). On the phenomenon of presenting a distant land as ‘the
location of Roman virtues’ (in this case libertas in Britain), see Katherine Clarke, ‘An island nation:

re-reading Tacitus’ Agricola
179

’

JRS 91 (2001), 94-112, esp. 106—9.

non Samnis, non Poeni, non Hispaniae Galliaeue, ne Parthi quidem saepius admonuere: quippe regno
Arsacis acrior est Germanorum libertas.

180

Clay and Purvis, Four island utopias, pp. 168-75.

no

Features ofa discourse

long as they are out of reach: though India had at an early stage of Greek
history the makings of a utopia, that status was compromised by various

developments (including the writing of texts) that brought it closer and

made it more familiar. Certainly, there are elements that can be called
utopian, but that does not mean we can readily describe Strabo’s or Pliny’s
India as a utopia. Rather, we remain on safer ground by stressing the radical difference of India - a difference informed by its spatial difference, its
overall difficulty of access to the Mediterranean world. If religious travel

was, in the first instance, travel elsewhere,

181

then India was a destina-

tion par excellence. In practice, this is the case less often in the religious

than in the commercial sphere. India’s utopianism, then is a limited thing;
to identify it in ancient accounts such as that of Strabo is useful mostly
in so far as it emphasises India’s inaccessibility, a phenomenon that kept

open the possibility of implicit comparison between it and the Roman
world.

///. y. Narrative space

India has already emerged as a space onto which Mediterranean people

could project thought-experiments that sometimes merit the term utopia.
In addition, India was good to narrate, in the sense that made possible
certain turns of event in the Greek novel. Travel was central to Iambulus’

account of the Islands of the Sun, islands apparently situated on the searoute between Aithiopia and India. But the pre-eminent case occurs in

Xenophon of Ephesus’ Ephesian tale.
At one point the heroine, Anthia, is captured by pirates and taken to
Alexandria. Here she is bought as a slave by the Indian king,
(3 ii. 2).
.

Psammis

He intends to ravish her but desists once told that she is a priestess

of Isis and must maintain her virginity until she reaches a marriageable

by nature’ (3.11.4) that he
Soon thereafter, the bandit Hippothous heads up the Nile,
though bypassing Alexandria (4.1.5). In Upper Egypt, ‘near to Ethiopia’, he
age. It is because ‘barbarians are superstitious

acquiesces.

and his five hundred companions have a field day because ‘there was a large
group of traders passing through en route to Ethiopia and India’ (4.1.5).
Anthia is on the verge of being shipped from Upper Egypt to India, at
the behest of Psammis (4.3.3). She prays to Isis to intervene, to prevent
her from being taken to India, ‘far from the land of Ephesus, far from the
remains of Habrocomes’ (the hero, whom she mistakenly thinks has died).
181

Eisner, ‘Greek pilgrim’, 9.

India described

hi

As if in answer to her prayer, Hippothous apprehends and kills Psammis,
and thus obviates her journey to India and ultimately makes it possible for
Anthia and Habrocomes to reunite.
Heliodorus’ references to luxury goods are in many ways cliched and
typical of Roman imperial references to luxury goods. But even here, the
Nile connects the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean. When India occurs
in Xenophon of Ephesus, again it is the Nile which pushes and pulls in
each direction. In this story India serves to maximise narrative space. In
the Ephesian tale the mere mention of India invests the story with further,
181
unspecified possibilities, and hence contributes to its suspense.
In this
way India provides the Greek novel with narrative space.

III. 6. Analogy

The issue of translation has many aspects. While those related to (or absent
from) the practicalities of commercial travel will be considered in Chapter 4,
there is another, broader sense in which translation demands our attention,

namely translation between different cultures. More often than not, this
is

implicit rather than explicit.' 83 The principle is a simple but rich one:

the less known becomes intelligible through the better known. In other

words, this is a negotiation of the familiar and the unfamiliar, of the known

and the strange (the marvel being an extreme case of the strange). Given
this definition, the ethnographic tropes of inversion and comparison may
thus be considered subspecies of the principle of translation. We see in
these modes a number of ways in which writers communicate with their

audiences, working within the limits imposed by literary genres and their

attendant horizons of expectation.

A few examples will suffice to illustrate the principle at work within Indographic traditions. Strabo’s description of India is striking for its persistent

comparison with Egypt and Aithiopia, the point of comparison being the
Nile valley. By Strabo’s time there was a long-standing precedent for the
transference of features between India and Africa, so this should in principle

come as no surprise. But what is striking is the persistence of the scheme,
as if it provides Strabo with a framework of explanation.

182

These possibilities are consonant with the kind of monsoon travel described in Chapter 4, section
III. 2 below. Both the hydreumata in the Eastern Desert and the Muziris papyrus are reminders of
the dangers facing a merchant bringing goods from India to the Mediterranean.

183

For example, James Clifford, Routes: travel and translation in the late twentieth century (Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press, 1997), p. n, ‘assumes that all broadly meaningful concepts, terms
such as “travel”, are translations, built from imperfect equivalences’.

H2

Features ofa discourse

Another point of ethnographic comparison that has already come up
in this chapter has been between Indians and Scythians. This too can be
easily

understood, given the geographical proximity of the two peoples.

In the texts examined Scythians are invoked as a way of showing that

Indian society has changed, with the help of Heracles and Dionysus, from

nomadism to sedentary pastoralism. The Scythians are thus presented as
the archetypal nomads, whose lifestyle precedes that of agriculture in a
schema of progress 184 in this context their lifestyle represents the antithesis
;

of civilisation as brought by Alexander:

Long ago the Indians, [Megasthenes says], were nomads, like the non-agricultural
Scythians, who wander in their waggons and decamp from one part of Scythia
to another, neither dwelling in cities nor reverencing the gods’ shrines. (Arr. Ind.
7-i)‘

85

This comparison turns on a negative mode of description. In fact many
negatives are found in descriptions, on the lines of the following: ‘There are

no X among the Indians,’ where X corresponds to some familiar aspect of

Greco-Roman life, such as agriculture or slavery. It is standard practice for
pastoral nomads to be described in the rhetoric of lack 186 The background
.

to this is a Roman sense of its own empire as consisting, in the first instance,

of cities. Thus, when the second-century sophist Aelius Aristides gives a
speech To Rome, he reveals a provincial’s admiration for the empire’s urban
culture

187
.

The following comment by Curtius shows that inversion is a possible
mode of ethnographic understanding too: here India inverts nature’s known
and normal pattern. But, oddly, Curtius stresses not the explanatory power
of this principle, but its inexplicability:
But in that region the earth so inverts the regular order of seasons that when other
parts become hot with the sun’s heat,

184

snow covers India; and conversely, when

Hartog, Mirror of Herodotus Arthur O. Lovejoy and George Boas, Primitivism and related ideas
;

in antiquity (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1935), pp. 287-367; and Brent D. Shaw,
‘“Eaters of flesh, drinkers of milk”: the ancient Mediterranean ideology of the pastoral nomad’,
Ancient Society 13-14 (1982-3), 5-31, on Scythians as ‘typical’ nomads.
185

TrdAai uev

8f]

vopaSas eTvai

'IvSous, Kaflaittp Zku0ecov

tous oOk apo-rijpas, ot fui rijcnv

ctpd^ijcn trAavcbpEvoi SAAote aAApv Tps 2ku9itis dpEipouarv, oute TToAr|a$ oikeovtes oute iEpa

0ECOV cte|3ovtes.
186

Hartog, Mirror of Herodotus; Shaw, ‘Eaters of flesh’; cf. John Matthews, The Roman Empire of

Ammianus (London: Duckworth, 1989), pp. 333-42 on the Huns.
187

On towns and cities as the ‘sinews of empire’, Brent D. Shaw, ‘Rebels and outsiders’, CAH, 2nd
edn (2000), vol. XI, pp. 361—403, at 362. Clifford Ando, Imperial ideology and provincial loyalty in
the Roman empire (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), presents consensus as crucial to

the stability of the empire.

India described

113

other parts become cold, unbearable heat prevails there. There is no reason for this
inversion of nature. (8.9.13)

188

Curtius appeals to nature as the norm, in order to show the extent of
India’s divergence. Immediately after this balancing of the known and the

unknown, he proceeds to reassure readers that at least the surrounding sea
189
is like other seas, and despite its name is not unusual in its colour.
Again,
we see here a delicate negotiation between the known, determined by set
patterns of language and literary genre, and the unknown — which is, after

all,

the quality that assures the interest-value of a story, even as familiar a

story as that of Alexander’s expedition.

III. 7.

Fragments

Throughout this chapter and the former, fragments have loomed so large as
a literary form that they demand detailed consideration. This is opportune,
given that the focus here is on points of reception rather than of origin for

many of the pieces of information about India. Certainly there is a tendency
in accounts of India towards excerption and towards critical comment about
truth and fiction. 190 Strabo and Pliny, in particular, refer to earlier writers

whom they claim to be quoting or paraphrasing, often with evaluative
comment. Notoriously, Diodorus is the counter-example here, as one who
avoids discussing or even mentioning his sources. 191 In this, doxography is

used as a means of conveying opinions — as if concern with supposed sourcecriticism leads to a process whereby an author divides up the information he

has to hand. In some cases we see a tension between the protracted narrative
description and the curious detail, the marvel, which is often subjected to
source-criticism - what we might call the doxographic habit.

Even this

phenomenon is complex: it can by turns allow both critical evaluation and
it can make it possible for a writer to hide behind ‘authorities’.
In the purely formal sense, in keeping with Jacoby’s Fragmente der grieckis-

chen Historiker there is no difficulty in identifying a fragment. By this way
,

of thinking, a fragment is something the scholar recognises on sight or by
instinct. Yet, on closer examination, things are not so simple as they might

seem. For one thing, Jacoby’s own magnum opus has recently come under
188

sed adeo in ilia plaga mundus status temporum uices mutat, ut, cum alia feruore solis exaestuant Indiam
,

nines obruant, rursusque, ubi cetera rigent, illic intolerandus aestus existat. nec, cur uerterit se natura,
causa.
189

‘Indeed, the sea that washes it does not differ from others with regard to its colour.’ (8.9.14)

190

Gabba, ‘True history’; cf. Romm, Edges pp. 95-103.

191

Sacks, Diodorus Siculus

,

;

cf.

Hornbiower’s introduction to Greek historiography ed. Hornblower.
,

H4
fire

Features ofa discourse
for its at times deceptively facile reconstruction

of lost historians. 192

What is more, if we allow ourselves to think in broader terms about the
concept of the fragment, we can detect in it some conflicting tendencies.
For one thing, we can identify its importance to source-criticism. To follow
the lines of Greenblatt’s analysis of medieval travel-writing, 193 one might
say that the source-criticism here reflects the author’s desire to strengthen
his position as an ‘authorizing self, as a dependable source in writing about

material that defies credibility. Yet, in trying to strengthen their own position by this means, Strabo and Pliny in fact reduce their own texts to a
collection of fragments,

and in so doing effectively fragment and hence

reduce the unity of their own writing. Diodorus is the odd one out in this:
while his own work draws heavily on earlier sources, he seldom identifies

them as such, and in the process he tends not to disrupt his own narrative
with an evaluation of sources.
In his essay, translated as ‘A lover’s discourse: fragments,’ Roland Barthes
offers a sophisticated analysis

of the fragment as a unit of language and

thought. In utterances about the erotic, it is, for Barthes, not so much a

matter of individual authors creating their own texts, but more a discourse
collectively created over a period of time. There is, on this analysis, a lover’s

discourse that pre-exists any individual love-poet, a discourse prone to
infinite fragmentation and reassembly. 194

Even making provision for obvious and major differences in context,
there might be something to gain here in identifying an ethnographer’s

discourse on the same lines. As for love, so for the ends of the earth, and not
least India: in each case, there is a significant degree of repetition of the same

kinds of phenomenon. The marvel is a prime example: familiar already by

the time of Ctesias, it was to be much written about in Hellenistic times, and
will have been cliched by the time of Strabo and Pliny. Given the folkloric

nature of the marvellous creatures, they might seem to constitute exactly
the kind of discourse that lacks an original author and allows for repeated
borrowing and reworking. In these ways the ethnographic discourse about

India has a striking degree of openness, of iterability and malleability. Its
resilience over many centuries comes, then, as no surprise. The fact that

192

See esp. the essays by G. W. Bowersock, ‘Jacoby’s fragments and two Greek historians of pre-Islamic
Arabia’, and Guido Schepens, ‘Jacoby’s FGrHisr. problems, methods, prospects’, in Collecting

193

frag-

ments, ed. Most, pp. 173-85 and 144-72; cf. Chapter 1, section III.7 above.
Stephen Greenblatt Marvelous possessions: the wonder ofthe New World (University of Chicago Press,
,

99 ) PP- 48-9, following de Man, on Mandeville: ‘There is no original, no authorizing self, no
authentic text; all texts are translations of/ fragments that are themselves translations.’
r

1

,

194

This approach has been adopted in a recent study of Latin love-elegy: Duncan F. Kennedy, The arts

of love: five studies in the discourse of Roman love elegy (Cambridge University Press, 1993).

,

India described

ii5

Indographic discourse overlaps to such an extent with descriptions of other

remote places, especially Aithiopia and to a lesser extent Egypt (thus Strabo)

made it both more flexible and durable, and more intelligible to its audience,
especially when accompanied by discursive comparisons.
Pliny’s account is an extreme but not a unique case of inclusivity as a

principle: it is as if there were no limits on what might be included in the

Natural history, given its enormous scope, and no limits to what might
be included on any one topic discussed. He himself sounds an apologetic
note in the preface, admitting that much more could have been added on

any given topic 195 Pliny’s tendency to criticise sources must thus be seen
.

as an author’s attempt to gain some purchase on this inclusive principle.
Thus for Pliny it was more important to repeat Ctesias’ judgements than to

agree or disagree with its substance, to approve or disapprove of its source.

The reliability of any item of information seems outweighed by the need to
invoke an authority. In such cases it seems better to include bad information
than to omit it entirely.

The Natural history is a mish-mash of material, composed from within
and for a learned milieu already familiar with some degree of the material
discussed (at least some of the names invoked as authorities), and alert to
critical debate. It

is

obvious then that the work should be understood in

terms of the learned culture that produced it, where, contrary to modern
expectations, book-learning was more valued than autopsy 196 The copying
.

of earlier writers serves a useful purpose: in a society where the copying of
literary texts was a laboursome and expensive business, the encyclopaedia

served an important function in ensuring the survival of such information

and making it more widely available. The same is true in later antiquity for
the compendium and epitome.

To see only the limitations of the fragment would be to overlook its
creative potentialities. Most importantly, we should see the fragment as a

rhetorical mode, one that offered a number of possibilities: the chance to

reshape geographical discourse into new forms, the chance to offer critique

of earlier writers on any given subject.
If we bear in mind Pliny’s text particularly, the history of reception speaks
volumes for the power of these possibilities. Pliny’s Natural history itself a

compilation of doxae from a huge number of sources, as the lists of sources

making up his first book make plain. Yet the fate of the work was, as we
saw above, to be transmitted differently between one section and the next,

195

196

‘I

freely admit that

my work is open to considerable elaboration’: praef. 28, cf. 12.

Lloyd, Science, folklore and ideology pp. 140-52; Murphy, Pliny, p. 53.
,

ii 6

Features ofa discourse

and to be excerpted. As we trace the metamorphoses of the same kinds of
material over the centuries, the fragment emerges as the highest common

denominator, a unit for the transmission of information. In the case of
Pliny, the subsequent history of textual reception bears out the essentially

fragmentary quality of the work.

Why should Pliny be so concerned to debate with authorities? In principle, two explanations

may be offered: one stressing the power of existing

tradition, and the other stressing his need to establish his own place among

learned authorities. The two need not clash. Certainly there is no deny-

ing that Pliny was aware of the power wielded by scholarly tradition on

any of his topics, as is shown by his care in providing the list of sources
(auctoritates) for each of his 36 books. Yet this does not preclude a sense
of his own novelty and enterprise in writing a work as compendious as

the Natural history. Given the popularity of Antiquitates rerum humanarum
et divinarum,

Varro alone among Latin writers may have cast a powerful

shadow over Pliny’s enterprise, but other than that it is hard to imagine
that any other Latin work matched the breadth and scale of the Natural
history.

III. 8.

Closure

The question of closure in classical literature has most often been examined
in relation to verse, yet it is an interesting feature of the texts under discussion. 197 In chorography it is significant to observe, in particular, instances
where a description ends at a geographical point which marks a border of

knowledge, a point at which nothing more is known definitely or at all.
In Chapter 1, Alexander’s campaign emerged, more in analytical hindsight

than in actuality, as central to the creation of just such a supposed border

of knowledge. Strabo speaks of the Hypanis as a frontier of knowledge,
while admitting that after Alexander Greeks travelled farther east (15. 1.27
C698). 198 Later he even says that the land beyond the Hypanis is generally
agreed to be the best (15. 1.37 C702).

This principle of ethnographic closure can be paralleled in Mela and in
Tacitus. 199 In an Indian context, we need look no farther than a work that

does not participate in the learned tradition of Pliny and Strabo, the Periplus

ofthe Erythraean Sea. Its end is markedly indeterminate: ‘What lies beyond
this area, because of extremes of storm, bitter cold, and difficult terrain and
197

Deborah H. Roberts, Frances M. Dunn and Don P. Fowler (eds.), Classical closure: reading the end

198

Cf. Arrian Ind. 4.1 and 6.1.

in Greek and Latin literature (Princeton University Press, 1997).
199

Mela, see section I above.

India described

117

also because of some divine power of the gods, has remained unexplored

(dv£p£uvt|Ta)’ (66). The text does retail information about India’s south-

west coast beyond Nelkynda and about the east coast, but it does so briefly

and with less detail. Characteristic of the work’s pragmatism, it says little
about parts that were hardly known to its author, and presumably of little
direct relevance to its primary audience. The basic closural gesture bears

comparison with that of Tacitus’ Germania (46):

The rest is fabulous: that the Hellusii and Oxiones have the mouths and faces
of humans but the bodies and limbs of animals. But I shall leave undecided that
which is unknown 100
.

Moving ever farther north, Tacitus describes Suebia, then the wild Fenni,
by ‘remarkable barbarism and appalling poverty’, before
reaching this ending. In the endings of both the Periplus and the Germania this concluding suspension of comment is all the more significant

characterised

for the amount of detail that precedes them.

IV.

201

CONCLUSION

In the first chapter we surveyed two phases of Mediterranean Indography a

first,

pre-Alexander and particularly an Achaemenid phase, in which

the elements of a Greek discourse about India as a place of marvellous

phenomena took shape; and a second a phase from Alexander’s expedition
to Megasthenes, when the amount of information about India increased
considerably. In this chapter we have seen a third, imperial phase, examined
with regard to the contexts in which Romans thought, spoke and wrote
about India, and the rhetorical tropes which they employed in doing so.

Even if provision is made for the potential optical illusion whereby Romanperiod texts are now hard to distinguish from their Hellenistic sources, there

does appear to be a considerable degree of overlap in content between these

second and third phases of Indography.

The recurrence of the marvel, that hallmark of Hellenistic literature,
in sources

200

201

of the Augustan period and beyond is a major theme in this

cetera iam fabulosa: Hellusios et Oxionas ora hominum voltusque, corpora atque artus ferarum gerere:
quod ego ut incompertum in medio relinquam.
To take a further example, Mela’s comments on Africa also equate the periphery with barbarism
(1.46—47): the shores are inhabited by people who live by Roman customs; moving on, one comes
to the antisocial Gamphasantes, then finally to the headless Blemmyes. This movement inland,
within only the small section of a work, it must be admitted, reveals a variation on the theme of

the periplus. It also alerts us to the fact that closure must be seen as a principle within individual
sections of composite topographic works, not just within works as a whole.

n8

Features ofa discourse

Indographic discourse. Its implications were enormous. Most notably, it
stimulated the need for proof and refutation, and for frequent recourse to

The constant appeal to authorities had the effect of
making otherwise lengthy texts like Strabo’s and Pliny’s into collections of

literary authorities.

fragments. Indeed the fragment is a major feature of Indographic literature,
representing a kind of lowest common denominator of information, ever
open to being recycled and reused in new contexts. Pliny himself emerges
as a nodal point in the history of ideas:

he drew on an enormous variety
of sources, mostly but not only Hellenistic, and later suffered the same
fate of being excerpted and epitomised. Pliny is an author that illustrates

the tenacity of the literary tradition, and its imperviousness to new infor-

mation. As Chapter 6 will show, Buddhism is a topic which shows that

Greco-Roman sources were slow to recognise historical change: it does not
appear in Greek and Latin texts until several centuries after its spread.
This tenacity of a canon of information has been shown to rest on written
sources. But that conclusion cannot obscure the fact that Roman authors

did in fact add some new information, even if somewhat grudgingly. Strabo

may have echoed an old prejudice against commercial traders as sources
of topographical information, but he does reveal an awareness of them.
Claudius Ptolemy, composing his Geography some 150 years later, is even

more open to commercially obtained information, and in fact his fuller
topography of the Bay of Bengal would not have been possible without
information gleaned from traders.
In conclusion, then, an overarching question may help to make sense of
the many smaller questions discussed along the way: was knowledge about

India gathered as a product or a process? There are in Pliny’s text a few
suggestions of how information was gathered, so that, for all its reliance

on written sources, there is an element of process within that composite
text. It has been

suggested that Pliny is an eminent case of an author for

whom knowledge generally is static, 202 and to an extent this is undoubtedly
true.

But at the same time there are hints of Pliny’s receptiveness to new

information, not least in the context of commercial travel. This comes as

low prestige of traders, and given the prominence
of bookish auctoritas-, but nonetheless there are traces that deserve serious
a surprise, given the

consideration.

We might say, by way of conclusion, that despite all

it

was

a process, though a slow one.

202

Gian Biagio Conte, Genres and readers: Lucretius, Love elegy, Pliny’s encyclopedia
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994).

,

tr.

Glenn W. Most

India described
It

119

would be true to say that the marvel, so important to this chapter as to

the foregoing, is visually conceived in the first instance, though of course
verbally conveyed. The tropes of comparison and inversion are its variants:

they offer modes of understanding, of relating known to unknown, whereas

marvel in its purest form marks the inability to comprehend. To the extent
that the marvel invited criticism, proof and refutation,

it

also

spawned

the doxographic habit, whereby textual authorities are cited, sometimes in

competition. This makes large texts like Strabo’s or Pliny’s effectively into
collections of fragments: despite the conceptual unity of those texts, they
retain by virtue of the doxographic habit a certain mosaic quality which in
its later reception

was to prove both a strength and a weakness. In the case of

Strabo, the tendency to link pieces of information with individual authors
also gave a certain amount of room for the authorial persona to be present in

the text: Strabo himself, or the ‘author function’ in Barthes’ term, is cited as
a rival source of authority. Even Strabo, when he dismisses the reliability of
traders as sources of information, makes reference to contemporary sources.

On the whole, the authority of literary texts is paramount, and clearly
predominant over autopsy; yet, oddly enough, when an earlier author has
himself engaged in autopsy, his own trustworthiness increases thereby. If

Megasthenes is controversial in his Roman imperial afterlife, that is because
his trustworthiness is subject to doubt by the remoteness of his theme and

the prominence of the marvel within it. Yet his travels to India were a source

of credibility. Ctesias, on the other hand, is easily dismissed on the grounds,
explicit or otherwise, that he has not visited India himself.

We have seen to what extent Pliny is a nodal point in the history of
ideas.

He himself excerpted earlier works, even his own, if we can consider

the passage 7.21-32 as a summary of his own lengthier treatment in the

foregoing book. Excerption was to be the fate of his own Natural history
in later centuries. This is shown both by the variegated textual tradition

of the work and by its openness to being excerpted and epitomised. To a
large degree, his own procedure prefigured the fate of his work. And this
fate was to prove typical of marvel-based ethnography in the

Roman west.

For Mark Twain in the epigraph to this chapter, India’s ‘extraordinary’
qualities made it difficult to describe. For Roman writers, the ethnographic

questionnaire was a powerful grid by which to comprehend a foreign group

and its locale. But it is also true that the process of ‘hanging tags’ illustrates
the limits of representation. Such tropes as comparison and inversion are
only helpful up to a certain point. The periplus as a form is best suited
to coastlines in or bordering the Mediterranean. The marvel, shared also

120

Features ofa discourse

with other distant places, implies India’s abundance but also emphasizes its
strangeness. By such means, certain aspects of India come to the fore. Pliny

and Ptolemy, with their onomastic enthusiasms, by which they devote

much effort to the naming of settlements and natural features, present
certain kinds of information at the expense of others; indications of anti-

quity that attempt to subsume Indian history into Greek. Other aspects

of Indography, including references to sati, involve social critique of Rome
itself, particularly among authors that merely mention India in passing.
Such attempted alignments are acts of translation, in the broader sense of

that term, and provided more ambitious though still limited ways of rep-

resenting India and Indians to Roman audiences. But there were different

kinds of Roman audience, at different social levels and with different degrees

of learning. If this survey of ethnographic traditions has presented a varied
set of Indias, that

is

because of the varied registers of spatial knowledge

operating within the Roman empire.

CHAPTER 3
India depicted

So geographers in Africk maps with savage pictures fill their gaps, and
o’er unhabitable downs place elephants for want of towns.

Jonathan Swift, from ‘Poetry, a rhapsody’
If the contours of the literary India have received much attention recently,

there has been much less discussion about visual traditions for representing
it.

Whereas the compendious Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae,

offers only one image under the rubric ‘India’,

it is

more than a century

ago, in an article by Hans Graeven, that a full-scale attempt was last made

The aim of this chapter is to
revisit the material studied by Graeven, and to reconsider how India was
to survey all artifacts representing India

represented in Greek and

1

.

Roman art. Here, even more so than in the

previous chapter, it is necessary to treat the end of antiquity in a somewhat
elastic fashion: a central problem to emerge will be the belated appearance

of visual representations to match literary references that were long known
in antiquity.

The artifacts that may be thought to represent India offer two difficulties

of a methodological nature, and it is worth considering these at the

outset. First, there is the very practical problem of identification. What are

the criteria by which any given artifact may be thought to represent India
specifically? There is a danger of circularity: we do not know what India is

until we have found it, and only once we have found it do we know what
we were looking for in the first place. This calls for a provisional, working
solution: what are the distinguishing features of India when it occurs in
Greco-Roman art? Second, in dealing with artistic representations of for-

eign peoples, there is the strategic question of cultural boundaries. Within
which visual tradition or traditions should we analyse those representations?

1

Jean Ch. Baity, ‘India’, Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae (Zurich: Artemis, 1981-99), vol.
V.i, cols. 654-5; Hans Graeven, ‘Darstellungen der Inder in antiken Kunstwerken’^D^/fBJ 15 (1900),

195-218; see now also Whittaker, Rome and its frontiers., pp. 123—6.

121

Features ofa discourse

122

The problem arises when art-historical analysis takes the linear, ‘vertical’
approach of positing traditions that are unities over time, effectively closed
to the outside world, except, at most, in special and discernible circumstances. Rather, the

approach here will be to try to explain the images

largely within the artistic traditions of Greece and Rome. This is under-

taken as a conscious strategy, without precluding the possibility that some
features of these artifacts may be understood within the traditions of India.
I specifically avoid speaking

of cultural ‘influence’. 2 This is not to deny the

possibility that the Greco-Roman artifacts might have been responding to

visual traditions already existing in the subcontinent. Rather, here there is

the attempt, or even experiment, to see what eventuates when the Greco-

Roman artifacts are studied from within the artistic traditions they most
obviously share. Such an analysis does not preclude others.

The following pages begin with an outline of four groups of evidence,
divided thematically. Section II answers the need to step back from these

groups in search of a broader-based analysis, including a typology.

I.

VARIETIES OF IMAGE
Li. Marvel

The most obvious category with which to begin is that of the marvel. This
has emerged in the earliest Greek accounts, particularly those of Scylax

of Caryanda (Herodotus 4.44). Whereas Herodotus makes little reference
to monsters in his account of India, they are the distinctive feature of
his later contemporary, Ctesias of Cnidos. Ctesias claims to have seen a

manticore ( martikhora ) at the Achaemenid court of Artaxerxes, once it had

been brought there as a gift for the King of Kings. 3 Indeed, when the word
occurs in Greek it is as a loanword from the Old Persian. 4 This creature

was destined to have a particularly long life in western tales of marvel,
for example in the manticore of medieval bestiaries, or in particular the
thirteenth-century travel writings of Marco Polo and Sir John Mandeville. 5
2

Though Derrett speaks about a literary tradition, the same basic principles can be applied to the
visual,

notably by Boardman, The Diffusion of classical art:, likewise Daniel Schlumberger, L’Orient

hellenise. LArtgrec etses heritiers dans TAsie non mediterraneenne (Paris: Michel, 1970). For a critique

of such approaches, with reference to Gandharan art, see S. Abe, ‘Wonder house’.

NA 4.21 (= F45dp) on this passage compare Chapter

3

Ael.

4

The Greek martikhora appears to be a loanword from Old Persian, corresponding to a reconstructed

1,

section 1 4 above.
.

compound, *martiya-khvara (‘man-eater’): Calvert Watkins, The American Heritage dictionary of
x
Indo-European roots 2nd edn (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2000), s.v. mer- and swel,

5

.

See, for example, the anthology compiled by Joe Nigg, The book offabulous beasts: a treasury ofwritings
from ancient times to the present (Oxford University Press, 1999), where the manticore emerges as a

India depicted

123

For a society centred on the ‘pond’ of the Mediterranean, to use Plato’s

term ( Phaedo 109b) marvels provided a ready conception of the edges of the
,

earth. It is therefore not surprising that, in the wider Greek world postdating

Alexander’s conquests, the marvel became a major part of the ethnographic

imagination. The persistence of the marvellous was further assured by the

prominence it attained in Roman geographies and ethnographies of the
early empire, especially Pliny the Elder’s Natural history. In keeping with

the popularity of this work in the western

Middle Ages, it is basically

a Plinian worldview that we find in the early medieval encyclopaedia of

Isidore of Seville, though one with Christian elements.

6

These monstrous races are a conflation of human and animal: they usually
lack human speech, and in many cases they share features with animals.

The background against which we must understand this is that the distinction between human, divine and animal was central to ancient Greek

worldviews. 7 Marvels thus have a transgressive quality in so far as they
depart from conventional categories of Greek thought. Further, it is worth

emphasising the remarkable persistence of these monsters over time. In the

words of their major scholar, Rudolf Wittkower,
‘Marvels of the east’ determined the western idea of India for 2000 years, and made
their way into natural science and geography, encyclopaedias and cosmographies,

romances and history, into maps, miniatures and sculpture. They gradually became
their power of survival was such that
they did not die altogether with the geographical discoveries and better knowledge
of the East, but lived on in pseudo-scientific dress right into the 17th and 18th

stock features of occidental mentality

centuries.

.

.

.

8

fabulous beast par excellence. Illustrated bestiaries, in which Christian moral teachings are extracted

from the animal world, are known from the twelfth and thirteenth centuries: T. H. White, The book
of beasts, being a translation from a Latin bestiary of the twelfth century (London: Cape, 1954). Joyce
E. Salisbury, ‘Human beasts and bestial humans in the Middle Ages’, in Animal acts: configuring the
human in western history, ed. Jennifer Ham and Matthew Senior (London: Routledge, 1997), pp. 9-22,
shows the philosophical problems they posed. The anonymous Greek text, Physiobgus (second century
ad or perhaps somewhat later) combines the Hellenistic tradition of natural history with Christian
interpretation, and is a major part of this tradition. On the use of the Physiologus in medieval sermons,
see Ron Baxter, ‘Learning from nature: lessons in virtue and vice in the Physiologus and bestiaries’,
in Virtue and vice: the personifications in the Index of Christian Art, ed. Colum Hourihane (Princeton

University Press, 2000), pp. 29-41; more generally, Nikolaus Henkel, Studien zum Physiologus im
Mittelalter (Tubingen: Niemeyer, 1976) and U. Treu, ‘The Greek Physiologus’, in Ancient history in

a modem university, ed. T. W. Hillard et al. (North Ryde, NSW: Macquarie University Press, 1998),
vol. II, pp. 426-32.
6
7

Borst, Naturgeschichte.

Jean-Pierre Vernant, Myth and society in ancient Greece,

tr.

Janet Lloyd (New York: Zone, 1990),

pp. 143-82.
8

Rudolf Wittkower, ‘Marvels of the East: a study in the history of monsters’, JWI 6 (1943), 159-97, at
159.

.

Features ofa discourse

124

demerit

Btot

xn

m bem lonb Ubw werbcn cttkb on bowbt

*

y>

biercebt:

v

mb ottgen. l£rtkh fmb bebet

tfitfltnmanbd)vnb btc Imgf

ftcbrnbetemanb vn gcpcm
„
,
,
Jrem gcgcn bcrn parab 8 beybcmftufs (Sangce fmb ct
ltd) maifdim btc cffat mbt& batm fit babrnfo fkirtcti
numb baa fit baa qcrrand mtt ant balm anfwflen

mb

tcben vom aefmAcf ber $pffd mb plimten. vnb fhtboi
palbroubogan gefmad. sDafeibjl |Ittb raid) lewtan

nafcn etna cbnen atigtfichte. J£ttb<b M>cn tntbtn fo

grog Ubffeen boa fit 04a gam* .ingef ieht bamtt bebedK
Jtem ettlid) an jtmgcn. bic beaten tmaitbtr ir mavraig
ta
nut wtntfett ole btc doflaicwt.Jtem in ban lanb
lu baben etttef) fo gtofjc orn baa fit ben gontjen lab ba
mtt bebeden. jftem m bem lanb etbiopw wanbem criid>
mbcrgcbogai ala baa vibrnb etrtid) lebe rierhtmbcrt

0

lar.Jtcm mbd) baben Wmcr.lang naftn

mb gayfjfiife

baaftttbcfJbokfanbambonttiattan^er legib. jtejm
ctbiopta gem bon ntbcrgattg futb fcwt mtt tmem pray
ten ftifa.tmb fb febndl baa fit bit trtlben tf>ter

Jtcm tn ban lanb 0csb*a baben ic menfebeg cflalt ml
f

pferbe f^efa. Jtcm alba finb aucb Inrt fiipff dnpogen
iangf
trerben ntcbf frond bia jam too. Jtcm m be

mb

gefctttdttt bta groffen iaicwnbcre bfet

man baa m tnbw

mcn|dxn feyen mtt fed>a htttben.Jtem ettUcb nodet vfi
ra«?binb«tfW§cntroncnb.ctriu^btt an benbat mb
f3gm fkbe finger baben.cttkb m ben waffetn wonebe
balb menfdxn mb baibe pfetb* gcjlaU babenbe Jm
iraber mtt petten bta otiffbie praft aaffbe bawbt eben
vnb on bar. Jtcm m ctbtopta aegen bem mbergang ba
ben ctrficb wet awgf 0o fno m l£npta ftb<$n iexvt mn
jfrand>£bdfcn

mnb fi«bdn.tW<b tflale 3ugufhrt»e

iber geet bic verfeti gegem vnfent fiigen fere.

[groflet fiteyt
rten

Docb iff cm

m ber fcwtftt tvtber ben wone bea gemay

rolcfe.bae germggumb aUentbalben menfebe <mff
bie
gegen emanber fcwtibc bar

ber etbtn feyen.

j

mb

a fcbarrtcl gem b«
mel ftrcn.in vcvcvunbttfy trartlmb bocb ttnr ober bu
-tuff {lecn-rm»b bocb alle menfeben

bKtr fetfen gegcti rmta wombat rat fallen. 2lbcr bae
fcknbt aogber naatr.bamt gtctd>errraa als ba |inl bee
fedra nytmbert tfl bam u» ben fcttem.ba traffet nynbert
benn m ben waffcm.rnnb be? gayfltt nytmbctt berni tn
bem gayft.alfo au<b ber fbd ber ceben nynnbat anberg
Ixro barn tn trfclba.

#.

Figure 2 Monstrous people in the Nuremberg chronicle (Hartmann von Schedel, 1493).

Courtesy of Parkins Library, Duke University.

India depicted

125

Oddly enough, though these monsters stretch all the way into the eighteenth century, their visual

(as

opposed to verbal) depictions do not go

particularly far back, in fact no further than the early Middle Ages, it seems.
If this is true,

then the early medieval manuscripts of, say, the Alexander

romance, are belated representations of phenomena already known from
the early fifth century BC, a full millennium earlier. If one compares the

preponderance of monsters in Hellenistic literature, or in the Natural history of Pliny the Elder, then their absence in contemporary Greco-Roman
art is really striking. Hence, in order to find the implicit visuality of Pliny’s

ethnography realised, we need to look at medieval works, such as the
thirteenth-century Hereford (world) map. Monsters are clearly central to
this monastic, classicising view of India.

To take an even later example of the same phenomenon, Hartman von
Schedel’s Nuremberg chronicle of 1493 exhibits shadow-feet, one-eyed monsters and the like. In

both these cases, we see not only the continuity of

monsters but also how easily they can be transferred from one edge of the
earth to another: they are a marker of India, but also of other distant places,

such as Africa or Ethiopia. The Hereford map and the Nuremberg chronicle are,

in their different ways, realisations of the visuality implicit in the

monsters of Scylax of Caryanda and others. In both instances, the principle
seen here is not far from that enunciated by Jonathan Swift, writing about

eighteenth-century maps, in the passage quoted as the epigraph to this
chapter. In maps particularly, monsters serve as ‘place holders’ for exotic
locations: they are a response to horror vacui. The quotation is itself testa-

ment to the durability of the monsters into and beyond the early modern
period.

In a major study concentrating on the early modern through the colonial
period, monsters feature as a major part of the western artistic response to

Indian religious art. 9 It emerges that in Greco-Roman antiquity monsters

were even more than that: to a significant degree, they may be regarded as
a Mediterranean reaction to India tout court.

1 2 Triumph ofBacchus
.

.

Second, there are a number of sarcophagus reliefs, in which India is represented as part of the so-called triumph of Bacchus. This was a favourite
topic in Antonine and Severan times, that is, from around the mid-second

9

Partha Mitter, Much maligned monsters: history ofEuropean reactions to Indian art (Oxford: Clarendon,

1977 ).

)

India depicted

I2 7

through the early third century ad, though there are several literary references already in the Augustan age.

10

These depict a celebratory procession

of the god Bacchus or Dionysus, returning after his conquest of the Indians.
In some cases, male Indian prisoners are included; typically, elephants and
tigers or panthers pull his chariot. In

perhaps the most famous instance,

the sarcophagus at the Walters Gallery in Baltimore, there is even a giraffe.

This god is linked with the generative powers of nature, and hence the
exotic animals; his saving powers are such that his retinue ( thiasos includes

people from the earth’s imagined corners.

While Dionysus is one of the most frequently depicted of the gods
Greek ceramics, the theme of his triumphal return from the east is
of the Roman empire. In particular, it was in vogue in the
second and third centuries ad
At least two emperors from the earlier
part of this period, Trajan and Lucius Verus, conducted extensive campaigns to the east of the Mediterranean, so that, by extension, this ‘far
eastern’ motif had an immediate military context, as we shall discuss in
in

distinctive

11

.

Chapter 5.

The scene combines African motifs with Indian: as a species, the giraffe
of the Baltimore relief lives solely in sub-Saharan Africa and not in India.

The same piece includes two young boys, accompanied by a satyr, who are
presented as young followers of the god. The corkscrew-curl design of their
hair is a regular feature for the depiction of Africans in Greek and Roman
art.

On a fragment at the Metropolitan Museum, likewise from a Bacchic

triumph scene, African features are even more apparent: here thick lips and
12
a broad nose strengthen the ethnic identification.

Elephants are a problem here. The two separate genera of elephants,
the Indian and the African, differ considerably in appearance. Apart from

being substantially smaller, the Indian has smaller ears and a flatter head,

and a differently curved back. On this basis, it would seem feasible to try

10

Prop. 3. 17.21-22; Verg. Eel. 5.29-31; and Aen. 6.804-5; Ov. Ars am. 1.549-50; and somewhat later,
Sil. Pun. 17.645-48.

Bacchic processions were already mentioned by Catull. 64.251-64; cf. Ov. Met.

4.25—27. The yoking of tigers referred to in several of these texts seems to have symbolised civilising

power, and in the case of the Virgil texts mentioned may have been linked with the public image of

Augustus (at Hor. Carm. 3. 3. 13-15 the link is explicitly made).
11

The compendious work of Friedrich Matz, Die Dionysischen Sarkophage 4 vols. (Berlin: Mann,
1968-75), shows a marked centre of gravity in the empire. The conquest of the Indians is presented
,

in vol. Ill, pp. 422—33. As in the case of other polytheist mythology, Dionysian themes largely ceased

to be deployed around the time of Constantines Edict of Milan in ad 312/313:
Friihchristliche Sarkophage (Munich: Beck, 2000), p. 346.

Guntram Koch,

On vase paintings of the earlier period,

see esp. Thomas H. Carpenter, Dionysian imagery in Archaic Greek art (Oxford: Clarendon, 1997).
12

Anna Marguerite McCann, Roman sarcophagi in the Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York:
Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1978), p. 87.

Features ofa discourse

128

to distinguish the two in their artistic representations. 13 In certain instances

of ancient art it is possible to distinguish one of these from the other, but
even in such cases we cannot assume that the artist had seen the beasts in
the flesh, had grasped and could convey the differences between the genera.

A remarkable class of evidence is provided by a number of marble heads,
of which the finest and best known is now at the Galleria Borghese in Rome.
Others are in smaller galleries in Rome, and in Madrid and Copenhagen.
In each case there is a bearded man with a contemplative expression.

A

knot on the top creates the effect of an Indian hairstyle on what
would otherwise be unexceptional marble heads from the Severan age or
somewhat earlier. 14 In the case of the Galleria Borghese bust, the use of
cirrus

coloured marble ( bigio morato) distinctively indicates the dark complexion

of certain foreigners. 15 The connection with South Asia is easily established

by a similarity to the Boddhisatva figures of Gandharan art. These may
be considered a generic ethnic type (Volkstypus) rather than representing
individuals; the earlier dating of the busts would align them with the bar-

barians commonly represented in Trajanic reliefs. One scholar has gone so
far as to link this ethnic type with the spate of foreign ambassadors received

by Trajan after his return to Rome in ad 107, since we know that Indians
were among their number. 16 It is also tempting to link these hairstyles with
the late-antique importation of ‘Indian hair’ ( capilli Indict) mentioned in
the Digest 17
.

The Barberini ivory is another work of art in which India is represented.
This carved ivory panel, housed at the Louvre, is now firmly linked with
the emperor Justinian I

(r.

ad 527—65). The mounted emperor occupies

the central panel, below the figure of Christ and two angels in the upper
panel.

At his feet is the bountiful earth, personified as a woman in an

attitude of supplication.

A general bringing a small figure of Nike (Victory)

to the emperor occupies the left-hand panel, the right panel being lost. The

13

H. H. Scullard, The elephant in the Greek and Roman world (London: Thames and Hudson, 1974),
23-4.

e.g. pp.
14

Piotr Bienkowski, Les Celtes dans les arts mineurs greco-romains (Cracow: Polish Academy, 1928),

pp.

228—42, and Rolf Michael Schneider, Bunte Barbaren: Orientalenstatuen aus farbigem Marmor in
der romischen Reprdsentationskunst (Worms: Werner, 1986), pp. 156-8. On the Trajanic connection,
Erika Simon, ‘Barbarenkopf’, in Fiihrer durch die djfentlichen Sammlungen klassischer Altertiimer
in Rom vol. II, ed. Wolfgang Helbig, 4th edn (Tubingen: Wasmuth, 1966), p. 718 no. 1957; cf.
Ancient Rome and India, ed. Rosa Maria Cimino (Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1994), pp. 126-8.
,

For cirrus knots on Boddhisatva figures see, e.g., The crossroads ofAsia: transformations in image

and symbol in the art of ancient Afghanistan and Pakistan, ed. Elizabeth Errington and Joe Cribb
(Cambridge: Ancient India and Iran Trust, 1992), pp. 199-229.
15

16

Schneider, Bunte Barbaren, p. 156

Simon, ‘Barbarenkopf, 718, referring to Cass. Dio 68.15.1.

17

See Chapter 4, section 1 4.
.

Figure 4 Marble head with cirrus knot, Trajanic. Villa Borghese, Rome.

130

Features ofa discourse

Figure 5 Barberini ivory, sixth century ad. Louvre, Paris.

lowest panel contains a number of well-known motifs from Roman art. At
the bottom right there are two men stooped in gestures of obeisance, their
legs covered and upper bodies naked; the heads of both are covered with
fabric, and in each case two horn-like objects stand erect from the front of

the head. One of them carries a large elephant tusk over his left shoulder.
They alternate with an elephant, its trunk pointed upward as if to honour

India depicted

131

the emperor, and a panther or tiger. Together these features suggest that

Indians are being represented. They are balanced in the lower panel with

two other ‘barbarian’ men, who also approach the emperor in reverence, but
the difference is that these are trousered and wear Phrygian-style caps, which

would link them with the Mesopotamian world, i.e. western rather than
18
southern Asia. If the men at the lowest panel do indeed represent Indians,
then there is a coincidence of subject-matter (which includes an ivory
tusk being offered to the emperor, and an elephant) and artistic medium.
In both the sarcophagi and the ivory, humans are in close proximity to

animals, but distinct from them. 19 The animals themselves are exotic but
realistic, without being monsters in the Plinian sense.

I.3.

Personification

Third, India is presented as a personification. The two instances here, if the
identification is correct, are the great hunt mosaic of the Villa Filosofiana

near Piazza Armerina in Sicily, and a silver platter from Lampsacus now at
the National Museum in Istanbul. These date from the early fourth and
the sixth centuries respectively.

The mosaic at the Villa Filosofiana contains a dark-skinned woman
reclining or sitting on a rock, half-naked and unshod.

20

She holds an ele-

phant tusk in her left hand, and in her right hand a bouquet. A common
feature in personifications of this type is the cornucopia, the horn of plenty,

which the tusk in this mosaic effectively replaces. 21 On her right is an elephant (again, whether African or Indian is a matter for debate), and on her
left a tiger; above the elephant is a phoenix. This bird presents a difficulty, for

in Greek and

Roman thinking the phoenix was usually linked with Egypt,

where Pharaonic art had long since represented it; 22 on the other hand,
18

See Anthony Cutlers article, ‘Barberini ivory’, in Oxford dictionary ofByzantium (Oxford: Claren-

don, 1991), with further bibliography; cf. Thomas F. Matthews, Byzantium from antiquity to the
19

20

Renaissance (New York: Abrams, 1998), p. 42.
The same is true, of course, for other ivory representations of elephants. Whether they were thought
to come from Africa or India, they still connote the expanse of empire, and hence the universal

reach of imperial power. Thus, the ivory diptych (probably fifth century), sometimes linked with
the Symmachus, shows the emperor, on his way to apotheosis, drawn in a carriage by four elephants.
Andrea Carandini et al., Filosofiana, the villa ofPiazza Armerina: the image ofa Roman aristocrat at
the time of Constantine (Palermo: Flaccovio, 1982), esp. p. 230, arguing that the woman represents
India.

21

Marcel le Glay, ‘Africa’, LIMC I.i (1981), 250-5, at 254 (arguing for the identification of the figure
as Africa).

22

Both Pliny (

HN 10.4) and Tacitus (Ann. 6.28) show the link in Roman thought between the

phoenix and the sun. See further Rainer Vollkommer ‘Phoinix IIP, LIMCVlll.i (1997), 987—9, and
,

R. van den Broek, The myth ofthe Phoenix, according to classical and early Christian traditions (Leiden:
Brill, 1972).

Features ofa discourse

132

Figure 6 Personification of India, apse of Great Hunt mosaic, Villa Filosofiana, Piazza

Armerina, Sicily, fourth century ad.

the elephant most immediately evokes a link with the Roman province of
Africa, as distinct from

Egypt 23 It is possible that the wealthy owner of
.

the villa was involved in the hunting of big game on the nearby African
continent and its importation to Rome, and it is in this way that the theme

of the great hunt mosaic (and the smaller hunt mosaic) has been explained.
But, in the case of the female figure adjoining the great hunt mosaic, the
identification with Africa is not convincing, given that the characteristic

feature of personifications of Africa was the presence of an elephant tusk,

horns or ears on the head of the female figure 24 Here we do have a tusk,
.

but it is cradled rather than worn on the head. Further, the tiger as a species
is

not to be found in any part of Africa, and in Roman art was typically

associated with India and other parts 25 It seems then that the elements of
.

the mosaic point in different directions within the eastern Mediterranean

and beyond. Against such a background and with these qualifications, it is
quite plausible to link the female figure with India.

23

25

Le Glay, ‘Africa’, gives several such instances; cf. Scullard, Elephant.

24

Le Glay, ‘Africa’.

On the geographic distribution of the tiger, see DNP ‘Tiger’. Again, an Achaemenid link is visible
,

when Ael. (NA 15.14) speaks of tigers as royal gifts.

India depicted

Figure 7 Personification of India, silver platter, Istanbul, sixth century AD. Courtesy of the

Deutsches Archaologisches Institut, Berlin.

The silver platter presents similar difficulties. It was found in Lampsacus,
in a basement together with several silver spoons carrying the inscription

Hagiou Georgiou (‘belonging to [the church of] Saint George’), so that we
may imagine that the silverware once belonged to a church by that name. It
depicts a female figure leaning or seated on elephant tusks. In her left hand

she holds a bow, and her right is raised, the palm opened outward. Over
curled hair she wears a turban, from which two sharp objects protrude

16

26
.

The turban, at least, can be explained with reference to an ancient Roman text. Curtius says the
following of Indian clothing: corpora usque ad pedes carbaso uelant, soleis pedes, capita linteis uinciunt
(‘They cover their bodies down to the feet with fabric, and wear sandals on their feet and linen

Features ofa discourse

134

She wears a richly embroidered robe that leaves her right breast uncovered,
a necklace,

and bracelets on her arms and wrists. Surrounding her are a

parrot and a guinea-fowl, two monkeys (both of which have neck-bands,

suggesting domestication), and at the bottom two men accompanied by
large cats on leashes. These men are themselves wearing loose-fitting robes,

turbans with two antenna-like objects sticking upward from them. 27

The substance of the platter is richly varied: a gold rim surrounds the
platter, and each of the surrounding images is gilded, except for the guinea-

fowl that is gilded merely in his feet and head. The woman’s body is covered

with finely worked black enamel; some of the enamel has come off the arms,
revealing the original silver, roughened so that the enamel would hold fast.

Her robes, jewellery, footwear and headwear are gilded, as are the tusks and
her bow.

The Indianness of this artifact has never been disputed since it came to the
attention of scholars, not least on the grounds of the animals. The parrot is
linked with India; the monkeys could be Indian; so too the cats, which have

been identified as a tiger and a panther respectively, by their coats and the
shape of their heads. Aelian in fact speaks of tamed monkeys and panthers
in India ( Historia animalium 15.14),

and the tiger is generally associated

with the subcontinent. The one anomaly is the guinea-fowl, which as a
species is unique to Africa; but on this platter its African provenance is

overshadowed by its Indian connections. 28 Part of the problem in making
the identification stems from the fact that personification in Roman art was

commonly used for provinces: 29 if it is indeed India that is represented here,
that would make it an exception, the consequences of which will require
explanation below.

One reason for stressing the Indian connections of these personifications
is their thematic resonance

with Indian art. A particularly widespread motif

in Kushan art is that of the woman and tree, known as the Salabhanjika

(named in part for the sal tree). 30 An example of this is the Vedika pillar
with Yaksini, found at Bharhut in Madhya Pradesh and dating to the Sunga

on their heads’: 8.9.21). Carbasus is the general word for fine fabric, and here may be used in
contradistinction to linen to indicate a cotton fabric: Graeven, ‘Darstellungen’, 206, with reference
to Strabo 15.1.71 C719.
27
28

These protruding objects invite comparison with the two men at the bottom of the Barberini ivory.
In so far as the figure suggests fertility, it recalls Bacchus’ status as an agricultural divinity in early
Italian religion: it shows nature at its most fecund, in ways that the elder Pliny or Strabo would have

understood.
29
J.

M. C. Toynbee, The Hadrianic school: a chapter in the history of Greek art (Cambridge University

Press, 1934).
30

Ananda K. Coomaraswamy, Yaksas (New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1971), pp. 32-6.

India depicted

135

period, roughly 100-80 bc. 31 Yakshi (or yaksinis), like their male counterparts called yaksas, are localised, lesser tutelary divinities, nature spirits that

were part of early Indie cults and later incorporated into Buddhism. Their
features are linked with fertility and abundance and ‘may connote both
their own procreativity and that of nature in general’.

32

In this case, the

tree-touching gesture awakens nature from its dormant state and makes
the tree bloom.

33

Typically, these voluptuous female figures wear heavy

earrings, bangles, armlets and necklaces.

Both of the Roman artifacts exhibit some of the features of the Salabhanjika. The Piazza Armerina mosaic has the woman beneath two trees,
grasping one with her right hand. On the platter, the woman’s left hand
is

entwined with the long bow, which may here be serving the same func-

tion as a tree; the palm of her right hand is pointed outward, in a gesture
similar to that of the Yaksini holding the branch. Both of the women are

wearing necklaces and bangles. Coincidences of this kind may be small
in themselves but their aggregative effect

is

substantial, especially when

the two personifications have been thought on other grounds to denote
India.

I.4. Christian topography

A tradition that stands out from the three above

is

that linked with the

Christian topography of Cosmas Indicopleustes. The text survives in three

manuscripts, which contain some striking illustrations of South Asian animals. The unusual quality of these miniatures matches the strangeness of

the text itself, a text arguing that the earth is in the shape of the Tabernacle

mentioned in the book of Genesis 34 In this respect it is an early and striking
example of what has been called ‘Mosaic ethnology’. 35
The manuscripts by which Cosmas’ text is reconstructed are three in
number, one from the ninth century and two from the eleventh century.
All three contain illustrations, though they differ as to what is illustrated;
.

31

This artifact of reddish-brown sandstone is now to be found at the Indian Museum in Calcutta:
Susan L. Huntington, The art ofancient India: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain (New York: Weatherhill, 1985),
p. 69; cf. Coomaraswamy, Yaksas, pp. 5 -6.

32

Huntington, Art ofancient India, p. 68.

33

Stanistaw J.

Czuma, Kushan sculpture images from early India with Rekha Morris (Cleveland:
:

,

Cleveland Museum of Art, 1985), p. 99.
34

For a scholarly edition of the work, including reproductions of the miniatures, see Wanda Wolska-

35

Trautmann, Aryans, pp. 41-61.

Conus (ed.), Cosmas Indicopleustes, Topographie chretienne, 3 vols. (Paris: Presses Universitaires,
1968).

136

Features ofa discourse

Figure 8 Yakshi (female figure), red sandstone, second century ad, Victoria and Albert

Museum, London.

I

India depicted

137

other cycles also are contained in these manuscripts. 36

It

is

clear

from

Cosmas’ references to illustrations that his original text contained images.
Furthermore, there are strong grounds to see the impact of classical art on
the tenth century especially, that is, in the period following the Byzantine
iconoclastic movement between 717 and 842. 37 All this gives prima facie

grounds for assuming that the existing illustrations reflect Cosmas’ original
manuscript.

Predominant among these miniatures are animals, though there are a
few humans and plants as well. The pattern throughout this book of the
Christian topography is that first there comes a miniature, then a description by Cosmas. The animals include a rhinoceros, bull-stag ( taurelaphos),

wild ox ( agriobous), unicorn ( monoceros ) and a hog-deer (choerelaphos)
Further, there

is

s

a giraffe that is vertically challenged (11.4), and a very

horse-like hippopotamus (literally ‘river-horse’, 11.9), both of which suggest that the artist had no personal knowledge of the animal concerned,

despite Cosmas’ claims to the contrary. There is a unicorn, but otherwise
all

the animals are recognisable creatures of the real world, rather than

monsters. 39

Apart from the animals there are also humans: one man is pictured below
a coconut tree, wearing a skirt-like garment that may represent a kind of
dhoti, and holding a scythe; another between a pepper-tree and a coconut

palm; another, rather damaged illustration, shows a man shooting a muskdeer. In the case of the most clearly visible of these, the

man exhibits the kind

of coiled hair usually identified with Africans. Some attention is paid to
social organisation: the story of the merchant Sopatrus implies an openness

and accessibility of Sri Lanka, and its intelligibility to the Roman world.
Cosmas also reflects an awareness of Christian missionary activity. 40 If this
is true, it would not be surprising that Cosmas’ description of Sri Lanka
36

The mss are the Codex Vaticanus Graecus 699 (9th century); Laurentianus Plut. IX.z8; Sinaiticus
Graecus 1186. See Paul Huber, Heilige Berge: Sinai, Athos, Golgota - Ikonen, Fresken, Miniaturen 2nd
,

37

edn (Zurich: Benziger, 1982), pp. 56-115, esp. 109-12.
Foremost in developing the idea of a ‘Macedonian Renaissance’, under the emperors Leo VI the
Wise and Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus, has been the work of Kurt Weitzmann. See, e.g., his
‘The classical in Byzantine art as a mode of individual expression’, in Byzantine Art, an [sic] European
art: lectures, n.e. (Athens: Department of Antiquities, 1966), pp. 148-77; and his articles in Studies in
classical and Byzantine manuscript illumination, ed. H. L. Kessler (University of Chicago Press, 1971),
esp. pp. 126-50 and 151-75. For a reconsideration of some of the same issues, see Anthony Cutler,
‘Originality as a cultural phenomenon’, in his Byzantium, Italy and the north: papers on cultural
relations (London: Pindar, 2000), pp. 26—45.

38

11. 1, 3, 5, 7, 8.

that the least realistically imaginable animal described gets the careful comment that
Cosmas has not seen a specimen: the povoKEpcos, which we might translate as unicorn (11.7).

39

It is telling

40

eKKAqala, KAqpiKol, tticttoI, 3.65.

138

Figure 9

Features ofa discourse

Cosmas Indicopleustes, manuscript miniatures, eleventh century. Sketches by
Alexander Hollmann.

India depicted

139

f

L
(c)

irno'no r*J* o C'

Figure 9

f

(

cont.)

14°
is

Features ofa discourse

one that emphasises and increases its familiarity to a Greek-speaking

readership in the Mediterranean.

With Cosmas we are thus not talking narrowly about the subcontinent itself but about Sri Lanka; the visual tradition linked with his work
focuses on animals rather than monsters particularly, but also includes some

humans engaged in perfectly everyday activities.

II.

A TYPOLOGY OF INDIAS

The analysis that emerges from this survey is to some extent already clear.
It is possible to divide it into three categories: together, these may be
understood as contexts within which India was understood by Greeks and

Romans. Indeed, it appears that there was no single, canonical way of presenting Indians; rather there were several ways, each corresponding to visual

codes already well established in other, non-Indian contexts. In other words,
the categories offered may be considered processes of transference from the
well known to the less well known, from the Mediterranean pond to vistas beyond. These categories or processes overlap, as will soon be evident,

but equally they shed some light on the ways in which visual codes could
and did generate meaning, and, by these familiarising processes, negotiated

between artist, patron and viewer in the social sphere.

The obvious point at which to begin is the monstrous paradigm that
places India on the edges of the earth. This has its origins in the earliest

Greek accounts of India, indeed in some of the earliest Greek historiography,
with its concern for ethnography and geography. The conflation of humans

and animals is central to this paradigm. This type of visual representation
especially belated, in view of the time separating Scylax and other early
Indographers on the one hand, and the many medieval images on the
is

other.

Secondly, the mosaic and the platter point to a provincial paradigm of
India. This is in some ways a surprise, given that India never was a Roman

province and, given our hindsight today, never came close to becoming one
(see further Chapter 5). But, for current purposes, this historical fact is less

significant than the nature of imperial self-presentation. The same process

of representation used for Africa in the mid-first century bc, and for other

Roman provinces in the first two centuries ad, served the subcontinent in
the fourth and sixth centuries. This connection goes some way towards
accounting for the femaleness of the figures: the personification of lands

and cities tends to be female, whereas rivers are usually represented as male
figures.

This is itself part of a phenomenon whereby Roman provincial

India depicted

141

conquest is symbolically represented in terms of sexual dominance, even
’
rape. 4

Underlying the image of India as a province is the issue of imperial
ideology,

and particularly the power of Alexander as a precedent. 42 As

further investigation will show, it is no accident that the personifications of
India, as seen on the mosaic and platter, effectively present it as a province.

The principle of military conquest is implicit equally in the Barberini ivory,
emphasised by the presence, in the lowest of its three panels, of adult men
stooped in gestures of obeisance. In that case, the emperor Justinian, seated

on his horse, has his feet touched by a woman (representing earth) and
his lance by a non- Roman (thus marked by trousers and headgear), both
of them in supplication. Seen against this comparandum, neither of the
two personifications overtly presents India in an attitude of subjugation. In
this respect these figures do not match, for example, the mid-first-century
ad relief from Aphrodisias: there, the emperor Claudius, in heroic nudity,
seizes the hair of Britannia as she lies on the ground, as if about to strike
her with his sword. Whereas Britannia here is represented as an Amazon,
India in the two images shows no explicitly martial context. 43
Thirdly and finally, there is an eastern or Indian Ocean paradigm. The

decisive point here is the overlap in elements associated with Africa and

those of India. In light of histories and archaeologies on the Indian Ocean
as a connected zone,

it

comes as no surprise that northeastern Africa or

Ethiopia should be considered within the same geographic unit as the
subcontinent; 44 nor indeed in light of Homer ( Odyssey 1.22— 24). 45 Indeed,

we should make a virtue out of the supposed confusion or conflation of
India and Africa: rather than being purely a mistake,

46

it

emerges here as a

means of comprehending the unfamiliar with reference to the known. On
41

Whittaker, Rome and its frontiers pp. 115-43, linking the symbol and the practice of rape.

42

E.g., Trajan in Cass. Dio 68.29.1, on which see further discussion in Chapter 5, section 1 5 below.

43

K. T. Erim, ‘A new relief showing Claudius and Britannia from Aphrodisias’, Britannia 13 (1982),

,

.

277-81. Several other artifacts of the second and third centuries ad, especially coins, show Britannia
as a province; some of them show subjected Britannia in relation to

Roman triumph, e.g., a medallion

from Trier (ad 296), in which the emperor Constantius raises Britannia from her kneeling, suppliant
III.i (1986), 167-9.
position. See further Martin Henig, ‘Britannia’, L1
Notably, though for a later period, K. N. Chaudhuri, Trade and civilisation in the Indian Ocean:
an economic history from the rise of Islam to 1750 (Cambridge University Press, 1985); Andre Wink,

MC

44

‘From the Mediterranean to the Indian Ocean: medieval history in geographic perspective’, CSSH
44.3 (2002), 416-4545

‘But the god [Apollo] had gone to the far-off Aethiopians - / the Aethiopians, remotest of people,

divided asunder, / some where the sun sets, and some where he rises.’ Cf. Chapter 1, section I.i
above.
46 Philip Mayerson,

A confusion of Indias: Asian India and African India in the Byzantine sources’,

JAOS 113 (1993), 169-74. See also Schneider, L’Ethiopie et Linde.

Features ofa discourse

142

the basis of this paradigm, there is no need to make a hard-and-fast decision

between an African, Egyptian and Indian identity for the Piazza Armerina

woman. When scholars do make such a choice, the decision rests merely on
the emphasising of one aspect at the expense of others. More compelling
than any such choice is the idea that the figure is a melange orientate, her
Indian features no less present than others, and thus signifying a more
generalised east, a land that was distant but still comprehensible.

Within this paradigm, it is Cosmas who gives India a sense of specificity
that is lacking in other writers.

On the one hand, this specificity is not

surprising: on theological grounds, he argues that the universe contains no

antipodes, against the Aristotelian philosopher John Philoponus. It suited

Cosmas’ cosmological purposes to present an India that was not marvellous
in the normal sense. This is underlined by the fact that he was himself a

trader who travelled to the subcontinent as well as along the east coast
of Africa, and he was in a position to say that he had seen, traded and

even eaten some of the animals he describes. It should be remembered

from the Piazza Armerina mosaic that animals were themselves objects of
luxury consumption in the Roman world, most notably in public displays.

Cosmas’ India, like that in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, is part of a
trading zone that stretched all the way to the Red Sea and the African coast.

III.
It is hard to

CONCLUSION

explain why visual representations of India should be so few

and far between. One possible line of argument is that the canon of classical iconography was already established by the Hellenistic period, when
marvellous creatures became so much a part of literature. If this is indeed
the case, artifacts add a further dimension to the phenomenon identified
by Dihle concerning sources of knowledge about India 47 Just as a literary
canon of information about India had been established by the Hellenistic
period, and allowed no room for the new and different information from
traders, so an iconographic canon had been established in the classical
.

period, before the Hellenistic concept of marvellous India took root.

But to what extent is it possible to speak of a visual canon for representing
India? It would be wrong to overestimate the coherency of such a canon.

Indeed, assessment of the evidence in this chapter leads to a conclusion
that distinguishes

it

in extent

from the texts considered earlier, namely

that there are significantly different Indias within the visual traditions of

47 Dihle, ‘Conception’.

India depicted

143

Greco-Roman antiquity. No single, canonical India has emerged here, but
rather a number of images that differ vastly from each other, belonging to
different visual discourses. Despite the paucity of evidence, it is tempting
to see in this variety a combination of positive and negative views, much
like the

mixture of admiration and contempt that has been seen in the

highly differentiated set of Roman images of Parthians

48
.

Such a conclusion

prepares us to consider Roman contexts for thinking about India, contexts
that relate variously to commodities, to imperial expansion or to holiness.

The variety we have seen between the three paradigms here confirms the
plurality that can be identified in the literary texts, between the Indus Valley

region of the Alexander historians on the one hand, and the western coast

known to those concerned with the monsoon trade. Given that sea-travel
was quicker and cheaper than long-distance overland travel, there is every
reason why Cosmas’ mercantile, southern India and Sri Lanka should have
a more human face and, in this sense, should more closely approximate the

Mediterranean world than does the Indus valley.

By way of a coda let us dwell briefly on one aspect of the ethnographic
record that seems to be entirely missing from the visual: the wise men,
the Brahmans and Gymnosophists of Alexander histories and the Alexan-

Though these made such impression on Greek
and Roman minds, they evidently do not occur in their representations
der Romance tradition.

of the subcontinent. Again, there is a chronological issue here in the for-

mation of visual traditions: it appears that the image of India as a place
of holiness postdates that of India as a place of marvel, and hence there
is

no visual tradition for depicting Indian holy men. This absence is all

the more striking when we compare later artifacts, such as the eighteenth-

century Mughal scene illustrating the interview between Alexander and
the philosophers (who here look effeminate rather than grizzled old men);

or in the nineteenth-century British-made imperial monument to Warren

Hastings now at Calcutta. On one side of Hastings is a Muslim and on
the other a bookish Hindu, whom we might understand as a distant but
direct descendant of the philosophers met by Alexander 49 In its own way,
.

this statue

may be taken as emblematic of the contrasting dynamics of

continuity and change in western visual representations of India.

48

Schneider, ‘Faszination’, surveying a much richer body of evidence.

49

Barbara Groseclose, ‘Imag(in)ing Indians’, Art History 13.4 (1990), 488-515.

PART III
Contexts ofa discourse

CHAPTER 4

Commodities

At some point in the micros ad, the poet Statius laments the death of
Priscilla, wife of the emperor Domitian’s courtier Abascantus. He praises
her morals by showing her imperviousness to the delights of the east:
Were you to offer her Babylonian riches or heavy Lydian treasure or alluring wealth
of Indians, Chinese or Arabs, she would have preferred to die unsullied and in chaste
poverty, to sacrifice her life so as to save her honour. ( Silvae 5.1.60— 63)

1

As this passage reveals, the moral high ground was to be gained by repudiating eastern luxuries, whether they came from Babylonia, Lydia, India,
China or Arabia. Statius is adapting a familiar trope: implicit in his rhetoric
of praise for Priscilla is the conspicuousness of that repudiation, what might
be called an inverted case offare lo splendido. For all its cliched nature, the
extract is especially interesting for three related reasons. Firstly, it conflates

various Asian lands, from Lydia in Asia Minor (the west coast of mod-

ern Turkey) to China, and thus informs us about mental maps of Statius’

world. This tendency is paralleled in other passages and deserves our close
attention. Secondly, it suggests that specific goods may be associated with
specific places: thus ‘Lydian treasure’,

much as in other texts silk is asso-

ciated with China, or pepper with India.

To take another example, the

elder Pliny explicitly states that perfumes are frequently named from their

countries of origin (13.4), as he goes on to illustrate in detail. Thirdly, the
extract points to the close embrace of economic and cultural aspects of

Roman civilisation. It raises the question, can and should those aspects be
kept apart?

This chapter will explore some of the problems to arise in the passage: in
particular, it will interrogate commodities and the discourse about them, as

one way of examining what India meant to ancient Romans. As such, this
is an essay in cognitive geography much more than it is an account of trade
1

si

Babylonos opes, Lydae si pondera gazae/Indorumque dares Serumque Arabumque potentes/diuitias,

mallet cum paupertate pudica! intemerata mori uitamque rependere famae.

147

Commodities

149

1
between South Asia and the Mediterranean world. Focusing on the period

of roughly the late first century bc to the sixth century ad we shall trace
the consumption of Indian goods, or rather, of supposedly Indian goods in
the Roman world. If, as the passage from Statius suggests, Romans tended
to identify goods with their supposed places of origin, the trend seems
particularly strong in the case of India.

On this model, we shall have to

inquire how distinctive its goods were, and hence how distinctive a place
it

proves to be by implication. More abstractly, by what processes was it

possible for Statius to group together those five lands into a generalised,

undifferentiated east? It is already clear that these questions will require

us to scrutinise the notion of the exotic as applied by Romans to India.

Throughout this, we are dealing with an India that slips and slides on the
one hand between the physical land that can today be visited or found
on a modern map, and the wonderland of ancient (and modern) thought.
Ultimately, through commodities linked with it, it is India’s place in the
orbis terrarum that we seek to outline more exactly.

I.

OBJECTS OF EXCHANGE AND THE MATERIALITY
OF DISTANCE

The emperor Justinian’s Digest the synthetic work of Roman law promulgated in ad 533, contains a passage which offers the following list of ‘articles
subject to duty’ upon entry into Alexandria:
,

Cinnamon, long pepper, white pepper, folium pentasphaerum (unidentified spice),
barbary leaf, putchuk ( costum and costamomum ), spikenard, Turian cassia, cassia bark, myrrh, amomum, ginger, cinnamon leaf, aroma Indicum (unspecified
Indian spice), galbanum, asafoetida, aloe-wood, barberry, astragalus, Arabian onyx,

cardamom, cinnamon bark, fine linen, Babylonian furs, Parthian furs, ivory,
Indian iron, raw cotton, lapis universus (unspecified precious stone), pearls, sardonyx, bloodstones, hyacinthus (precious stone, perhaps aquamarine), emeralds,
diamonds, lapis lazuli, turquoise, beryls, tortoise-stone, Indian or Assyrian drugs,

raw silk, garments made completely or partly from silk, painted hangings, fine linen
fabrics, silk yarn, Indian eunuchs, lions and lionesses, leopards, panthers, purple

cloth, cloth woven from sheep’s wool, orchil (rouge), Indian hair. (39.4.16.7)

This list of fifty-four items is attributed to Aelius Marcianus, a jurist of
the early third century; the very fact that it is quoted suggests that it still

2

More narrowly economic aspects are now covered by Ball, Rome in the east pp. 123-33; Gary K. Young,
Rome’s eastern trade: international commerce and imperial policy, 31 bc- ad 303 (London: Routledge,
2001), pp. 28-32 and passim Whittaker, Rome and its frontiers, pp. 163-80.
,

;

Contexts ofa discourse

150

had some relevance in the sixth century. 3 Whereas some of the objects are
specified as ‘Indian’, not all of these objects will have come from South

Asia, by any means.

Most will have come from the greater Red Sea area,

including the eastern Mediterranean, the Nile Valley and Arabian peninsula. Nonetheless, the list does give an idea of the kinds of luxury objects

traded via one of the Roman world’s most important entrepots, Alexandria;
it also

indicates the kinds of items subjected to taxation on the part of the

state.

If we wish to understand both the denotative and the connotative senses

of India on the strength of objects linked with it, we should begin with the
objects themselves, many of them emerging in the list quoted above. Let

us start in concrete fashion by considering those objects which we know to

have come from South Asia, as well as those which ancient people thought

Drawing substantially on archaeology, I focus

to have originated there.

here on objects found within the Mediterranean world itself, especially in
Italy,

rather than those found at intermediary points such as the Red Sea

coast (see section III. 2 below). Further, the rich material and documentary

remains from ancient Bactria will be bracketed off from the present inquiry
as tangential to the question at hand. 4 As will become clear in the course

of these pages, there are strong reasons to begin in a minimalistic fashion

and only then to broaden the focus, rather than to take too broad a view
from the start.

1 1. Spices and aromatics
.

Spices are a major kind of commodity to emerge from Marcian’s list, includ-

ing pepper, ginger and other unidentified items, which may have come ulti-

mately from India. These bring us not only to a problem of identification,

but also to one of definition. In common parlance, ‘spices’ today typically
refer to the products of tropical trees, and are typically used as condiments

to fine-tune the taste of food. If we turn to the Greco-Roman world, nei-

ther is the case, or at least not predominantly so. First, as the list itself

shows, there is considerable overlap in use between tropical spices in our
sense, such as pepper and cinnamon, and others which do not necessarily

come from tropical climates, e.g., terebinth, rue, cumin or saffron. What is
5

3

A. H. M. Jones, ‘The Asian trade in antiquity’, in The Roman economy: studies in ancient economic

and administrative history (Oxford: Blackwell, 1974), pp. 140-50, at 140.
4 Cf. Chapter
1, section II. 3 above.
5

These are mentioned in Roman texts, and came respectively from Syria, Greece, Egypt and Cilicia:
Innis Miller, The spice trade of the Roman empire (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969), pp. no— 18.

J.

Commodities

151

more, we see other vegetable products that we would call herbs being used
in many of the same contexts. Secondly, the ancient use of spices was by no

means limited to cuisine, especially if we are to give them their inclusive,
ancient sense. This is not the place for a history of spices in antiquity, but

nonetheless several familiar points need to be raised as we stick closely to
the ancient uses of spices.

6

Sources for the existence and use of spices in the Mediterranean are
richly varied, and texts such as this are only one kind. Most spectacularly,

shipwrecks from the Bronze Age show that pepper was being imported
into the Mediterranean as early as the second millennium bc, probably

by the Phoenicians originally. Greek literary texts beginning with Homer
reveal the use of aromatics in offering sacrifices to the gods. 7 The earliest

Greek works to mention pepper are the gynaecological treatises attributed
to Hippocrates: at one point the author glosses the spice as an ‘Indian

drug’

{On women’s diseases 1.81). Its typical use in these medical texts is

for disorders of the eyes, mixed into an ointment. Theophrastus’ work On

odours makes it clear that pepper was among the spices known and used
in the later fourth/early third centuries. Though he uses the loanword in
naming it (peperi), he makes no explicit mention of its Indian origin, in
which respect he differs from the Hippocratic text. Theophrastus’ treatise
is in fact central to any analysis of the social meaning of spices in the
ancient world: it makes clear that they were used for perfume-powders
{aromata), cosmetics, incense {thumiamatd), and antidotes to poison
theriaca ).

(i

But it is in three very different texts of the first century ad that we have
the most extensive evidence for the use of spices. These begin with the

army physician Dioscorides, whose Materia medica {c. ad 65), written in
Greek, illustrates the pharmacological uses. Secondly, Apicius, who lived

under Augustus and Tiberius, composed a series of gourmet recipes: texts
continued to be collected around his name until late antiquity. Of 478
recipes contained in the Apician corpus, almost all require some kind of

spicing; so did certain preparations of wine. It mentions nine spices which
6

An important history of spices in Greco-Roman antiquity is Miller s Spice trade, especially the survey
of pages 1-26. A problem with the later, more detailed part of the book is that it places too much
emphasis on the identification of ancient literary references with modern botanical classification
(on which, compare section V.2 below). See also Alfred Schmidt, ‘Drogen’, RE suppl.

V (1931),

pp. 172-82; Andrew Dalby, Siren feasts: a history offood and gastronomy in Greece (London: Routledge,
1996), pp. 137-42 and Dalby, Empire ofpleasures: luxury and indulgence in the Roman world (London:

Routledge, 2000), pp. 178-200.
7

Marcel Detienne, The gardens ofAdonis: spices in Greek mythology (Hassocks: Harvester, 1977); Marcel

Detienne and Jean-Pierre Vernant, The cuisine ofsacrifice among the Greeks (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1989).

Contexts ofa discourse

152

likely came from south or south-east Asia, namely pepper, ginger, putchuk

{costum), folium (nard-leaf?), malabathrum (cinnamon leaves or their oil),

spikenard, asafoetida, sesame seed and turmeric; the rest, a much longer
list,

probably came from within the bounds of the empire, or at least from

less far afield. Pepper is by far the favoured spice, being used even in sweet

dishes.

8

Thirdly, the elder Pliny devotes books 12 and 13 of his Natural

history to trees,

many of which are spice-bearing. Proceeding region by

region, he categorises spices and aromatics according to their provenance.

Thus, whereas Theophrastus speaks in general terms about spices, Pliny
provides a geography of them, however tentatively; as I shall argue below,
this difference should

be explained with reference to the increased map-

mindedness of Pliny’s age. 9
It is

thus very likely that many of the spices consumed in the Roman

world came from India: the most eminent case is provided by pepper,
both long pepper and black pepper, Piper longum and Piper nigrum, which
are native to northern and southern India respectively. Beyond pepper, an

Indian origin is likely also for other spices, such as aloe-wood (Aquilaria
agallocha, native to the

Himalayan region of modern Bhutan) turmeric

Curcuma domestica, southeast Asian), and cardamom (Elettaria cardamomum, native to Kerala and Tamil Nadu). But in most cases, neither modern
(

botany nor ancient texts allow any easy geography of spices: thus the ginger
taxed at Alexandria or served at Trimalchio’s dinner-party might come just
as easily from Java or Thailand as from India, or in fact from a combination
of those, if transported via the subcontinent. 10 It is impossible to make the

distinction, nor is it necessarily important to do so: what matters, for cur-

rent purposes, is to establish that such a commodity was known and valued
in the Roman world.

In some cases it is not easy to distinguish between spices of Indian origin
from those coming from Arabia or east Africa or southeast Asia. Notoriously, cinnamon is a case in point: Herodotus says it came from Dionysus’

birthplace, by which he might mean India or else a more generalised east
(3.111). At all events, he discusses it in relation to the Arabs, who are said to
have obtained it from the Phoenicians. On the other hand, archaeobotani-

cal evidence shows that it was native to Indonesia and Madagascar, perhaps

even before it grew in South Asia. 11

8
11

Miller, Spice trade, pp. 6— io.

9

Cf. Nicolet, Space, geography.

10

Miller, Spice trade , pp. 53—7.

Miller’s discussion of this (Spice trade, pp. 153-72), emphasising far-flung commercial links, is sug-

gestive but should be treated with caution. See Marie-Franjois Boussac and Jean-Franfois Salles
(eds.),

A gateway from the eastern Meditteranean to India: the Red Sea in antiquity (Delhi: Manohar,

2004), esp. the comment of Federico de Romanis, p. 24 n. 6).

Commodities

153

But one larger point should be emphasised amidst the problems and
uncertainties here. There is every indication that in Pliny’s time more spices

were available in the Mediterranean than ever before, so that his work should
be thought of as providing much information that will have been new to
his readers.

Quite apart from variety, it seems likely that this period also

witnessed the increased culinary use of spices, if the admittedly tendentious
evidence of Pliny, Athenaeus and Apicius is taken on board. Rome, the
ancient Mediterranean’s consumer city par excellence, had developed an
appetite for spices by the first century ad.
It

is

important to emphasise that the culinary use of spices was by

no means the earliest or most important in the Greco-Roman world. In
addition, it could be used as incense, in the production of perfumes, of

medicines, or it could be used to flavour wine. In fact, its culinary use as

seasoning ( condimentum ) was relatively small, perhaps the least of the categories mentioned. The first text specifically to mention these ‘condiments’
in the modern sense is that of Apicius.

In some ways pepper is the most important of the spices. Unlike others,
it is limited in its origins to India; it has variety

within itself, between white,

black and long pepper; it enjoyed a wide range of uses, especially in cooking.

The late-antique recipe book attributed to Apicius mentions pepper in most
cases, even for desserts. So valuable was it that attempts would be made to
‘adulterate’ it by secretly compounding it with dried, ground juniper berries
(Pliny 12.26-28) In fact, it is a standard part of Pliny’s description of any one
.

spice to say that it can be adulterated by some particular substitute; it is fair
to conclude that such manipulation was common practice. Archaeological

evidence for its domestic use as condiments is provided by pepper shakers

found in various parts of Italy. 12

From some thirteen years after Pliny’s death the city of Rome had its
own spice quarter, the horrea piperatoria built by the emperor Domitian
13
in ad 92. The continuing status of pepper as a luxury item well into late
antiquity is underlined by a striking statistic; in ad 408 when the city of

Rome was blockaded by the Visigoths under Alaric, the Senate offered him,
together with 5,000 lb of gold, 30,000 lb of silver and other gifts, no less

than 3,000 lb of pepper subject to his withdrawal (Zosimus Historia nova
5.35-42). Such a huge quantity is hard to square with what would otherwise

seem to be declining proportions in this trade.
12
13

D. E. Strong, Greek and Roman gold and silver plate (London: Methuen, 1966), pp. 154 and 178-80.
L. J. Richardson, Jr, A new topographical dictionary of ancient Rome (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1992), pp. 194-5; M. Piranomonte, ‘Horrea piperatoria’, in LTVR> vol. Ill, pp.

45 6

.

154

Contexts ofa discourse

How is the availability of spices conceptualised, more generally? Spices
are perhaps the commodity that is most open to the process of abstraction.

In Pliny’s Natural history the details and mechanics of their provenance are

an important topic in their own right; but this is perhaps the exception. On
the other hand, the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea may be closer to popular
thinking, since quite naturally it views spices by their places of availability,
that is, the coastal entrepots of Kerala rather than the hills of Tamil Nadu.

1 2 Precious stones
.

.

The elder Pliny (ad 23-79), discussing precious stones in the thirty-seventh
book of his Natural history, tells of several that he associates with India.

Among the stones that are explicitly marked as Indian are the diamond,
emerald, sardonyx, turquoise and onyx, to take merely those also mentioned

by Marcian. 14 It is significant also that there are many undifferentiated
references to precious stones from India, for example when the love elegist

Propertius mentions the hair of the beloved, ‘which an Indian gemstone
ties at the crown’ (2.22.10).

Curtius Rufus’ History ofAlexander speaks in

general terms of Indian rivers running with gold (8.9.18); Alexander, first

contemplating the conquest of India, was aware of stories of its great wealth:

The area [of India] was considered rich, not merely for its gold but also for its
precious stones and pearls, and thought to strive more for the luxurious life than
for grandeur. (8.5-3) 15

Here Curtius implies that the natural resources of India corrupt the lives
of its inhabitants. On the strength of passages such as this, it is tempting
to include here the pearl in our consideration, though it is not a stone
but an animal product. Here Pliny’s treatment stands out for its explicit

moralising, but he is not alone in this.

The fourth-century text purporting to be Alexander’s letter to his former
teacher Aristotle speaks at length of the precious stones and metals found
in India. This text has no historical value for reconstructing Alexander’s

expedition, but it does tell us much about popular conceptions of India
in the early fourth century: here India is a wonderland of unfathomable

wealth, a late Roman Eldorado that was just at or beyond the farthest
14

HN

A few examples of each will suffice. Diamonds: Plin.
37.56; Avienus Ora maritima 1320, 1364;
Aug. de civ. D. 21.4. Emeralds: Letter ofAlexander 9, 69; Avienus 1324. Sardonyx: Plin. HN}7.$6-%9;
Mart. 4.28.4; Isid. Etym. 16.8.4. Turquoise: Plin.

HN 37.110;

Isid.

Etym. 16.7.10. Onyx: Plin.

HN

37.90-91; Isid. Etym. 16.8.3.
15

dines regio habebatur non auro modo, sed gemmis quoque margaritisque,

magnificentiam exculta.

ad luxum magis quam ad

Commodities
possible limit of contemporary travel.

It is

155

worth noting that the list of

stones in the supposed Letter ofAlexander to Aristotle overlaps considerably
with that in Pliny’s Natural history, and hence the openness of Pliny’s text
to excerption and use in very different kinds of text.

The place of precious stones in Pliny’s encyclopaedic work points us to
one register of geographic information; it is another that we find in passing
references within a poem. A playful epigram from the end of the fourth
century centres on a mock competition between two artifacts purportedly

from India:

What is this stone? Amethyst. And this? I’m a wine-goblet - both of us from India
but unequal in our powers: the amethyst boasts that it exceeds the strength of my
liquid, but I boast that with my wine I can make drunk anyone who drinks me.
(

Epigrammata Bobiensia 20)

16

Light-hearted as it is, it is in such a popular reference that we see the notional

presence of India at the dinner-parties of elite Romans, an impression

confirmed by other accounts of Roman dinner-parties ( cenae) and the kinds
of conversations held at them. Athenaeus’ Deipnosophists (‘Philosophers
at dinner’, c. ad 200) is a special case of this, given that much of the
conversation-matter concerns the very business of eating and drinking.

This link between India and gemstones is important for late-antique
geographies of India, in which it is seen to adjoin the earthly paradise

17
.

Thus, when in the early fifth century ad Jerome speaks of India, he glosses
it with a comment about the riches to be found there, and also the fantastic
creatures guarding them:
That’s where the carbuncle, emerald, shining pearl and large pearl are to be found,

which promote female display; and mountains of gold, which humans cannot
come near because of dragons, griffins and monsters with enormous bodies, so that
18
we can be aware how well avarice is guarded. ( Letters 125. 3)
all of

This passage reveals a combination of a fairy-tale landscape, complete with
dragons, on the one hand, and social criticism on the other. Jarring as this

might at first seem, it is a way of emphasising the directness of the link

between distant India and Jerome’s (east) Mediterranean world. Given that
the monsoon trade in Jerome’s time is unlikely to have reached the heights

16

Amethystus gemma: / quis lapis hie? - amethystus - at hie ? - ego potor Iacchus, / ambo Indi, uerum

17

Lozovsky, The earth.

uiribus impariles: II ille mei laticis iactat se uincere uires, / ast ego potantes ebrificare mero.

18

ibi nascitur carbunculus et smaragdus et margarita candentia et uniones,

quibus nobilium feminarum

ardet ambitio; montesque aurei, quos adire propter dracones etgryphas et immensorum corporum monstra

hominibus impossibile est, ut ostendatur nobis quales custodes habeat avaritia.

Contexts ofa discourse

156
it

had in Pliny’s, the passage shows how central were precious stones to the

memory of India.

I.}.

Fabrics

Thirdly, let us consider fabrics. The Periplus makes several references to

the import of silk from the subcontinent. In fact, it was one of only two

products available at all of India’s four major exporting regions (the other
being nard): Muziris and Nelkynda on the southwest coast offered silk cloth
(

60 ovia IripiKa, 56); Barbarikon in the Indus delta ‘Chinese pelts, cloth

and yarn’ (ZipiKa SeppaTa xai oOovtov Kai vfjpa ZipiKov, 39); Barygaza
silk cloth and yarn (49); and the Ganges delta the same, as well as silk
floss (ipiov
ZppiKov, 64). There is some evidence that India had a
silk industry of its own by this point, 19 but this is not to deny that silk
was predominantly imported from China. 10 The Indian ports, it seems,
functioned largely as clearing-houses for Chinese goods. There is earlier
evidence for the island of Cos as a source of silk, and in fact the expression Coae vestes carries metaphorical force in the Augustan elegists as a
symbol of luxury. 11 But, if we are to go by the silence of our sources, Cos
was in the imperial period superseded by Asia as a source of silk. Strictly
speaking, the two products were in any case different, as the Coan variety was not spun by caterpillars, and was of a less fine texture. When
Diocletian’s price edict of ad 301 mentions raw silk (peTCX^a), we might
take that as a reference to the Chinese product, not the Coan. What is clear
.

is

.

.

that Roman writers were not particularly curious about how silk was

obtained. Major questions beset the issue of silk in the Roman world, for

example the specifics of its price, 11 and the existence of a ‘Silk Road’ across
central Asia, not least its supposed termini in east Asia and the eastern

Mediterranean. 13

The picture is further complicated by the fact that India itself, apart from
serving as a point of distribution of Chinese silk, was also the source of cotton, that is to say less highly valued textiles as well. Herodotus associates

19

20

JESHO 4 (1961), 42-64.
Manfred G. Raschke, ‘New studies in Roman commerce with the east’, ANRWW.9.1 (1978), 604-

L. Gopal, ‘Textiles in ancient India’,

1378; E. J. W. Barber, Prehistoric textiles (Princeton University Press, 1991), pp. 30-2.
21

Griffin, Latin poets , 1—31; Catharine Edwards,

22

Raschke, ‘New studies’, 624-5, 726 n. 315
The Central Asian excavations of Sir Aurel Stein played into western fascination with a ‘Silk
Road’ supposedly reaching nearly across the breadth of Asia; see now Young, Rome’s eastern trade
pp. 190-1. More skeptical are Millar, ‘Caravan cities’ and Ball, Rome in the east pp. 138-9.

The politics ofimmorality in ancient Rome (Cambridge

University Press, 1993), pp. 176-8.
23

,

,

i57

Commodities

cotton exclusively with India (3.106). This is consonant with archaeobotanical finds, since fibres of the genus Gossypium have been found in the Indus
24
Some five centuries later, a
number of references in the Periplus indicate that a range of textiles was

valley sites of Mohenjo Daro and Harappa.

traded together. Thus, for example, the author speaks of goods brought to
the port of Barygaza from its hinterland: the list ends with ‘Indian garments

of cotton; garments of molochinon\ and a considerable amount of cloth of
ordinary quality.’ 25

I.4. Slaves

In slave-holding societies generally there is often a tendency to name slaves
after their area of origin, and this was certainly true of the Greco-Roman

world. Yet a passage that makes the point explicitly emphasises that the

master is free to call the slave what he liked.

16

As a result names are a highly

qualified indicator of origin. This said, the available evidence for Indian
slaves in the Mediterranean world is particularly scant: with the exception of

the Digest passage above, all the references given are statements in passing.

Three suggestions of Indian slaves in the Italian world can be identified,
and as it happens all three refer to male slaves. 27 First, Horace speaks of a
swarthy wine-serving slave, named after one of the tributaries of the Indus:
18
Secondly, Martial
‘dusky Hydaspes emerges bearing Caecuban wines’.
aims a lampoon at one Caelia who, though Roman, consorts with various
foreign men, whom we might feasibly regard as slaves: ‘your Egyptian lover

[euphemism] sails to you from Alexandria, the dark-skinned Indian one

from the Red Sea’. 29 The shame of exotic promiscuousness on the part of
a Roman woman is heightened if the men involved were slaves, or even
freedmen. Here it is interesting to note the juxtaposition of Egyptian and

24

Barber, Prehistoric textiles pp. 32-3.

25

Ch. 48: aivbovES IvSiKai Kai poAoxivai Kai ikocvov xvSaTov oQoviov, cf. 51. Casson, Periplus
debate.
p. 249, takes molochinon to represent cotton garments of high quality, but this is open to
Strabo 7.3.12 C304: ‘The Athenians would either name their slaves after the peoples from whom

,

26

,

they were imported, like Lydos or Syros, or give them names which were common in those countries;
like Manes or Midas for a

Phrygian, or Tibios for a Paphlagonian.’ See further Fraser, Ptolemaic

Alexandria vol. II, p. 385.
,

27

Compare Tiberius’ disparaging comments about a demand for ‘exotic’ slaves (Tac. Ann. 3.53-4): see
section II below.

28

Sat. 2.8.14—15: procedit fiiscus Hydaspes / Caecuba uina ferens. Cf. Andre and Filliozat, Linde , p. 341.
It is

possible that Tibullus is also referring to Indian slaves at Elegies 2.3.55-56: illi sint comites fusci,

quos India torret/ solis et admotis inficit ignis equis. Cf. Steven E. Sidebotham, Roman economic policy
in the Erythra Thalassa, 30 bc- ad 217 (Leiden: Brill, 1986), p. 22.
29

7.30.3-4: et tibi de Pharia Menphiticus urbe fututor! nauigat, a rubris et niger Indus aquis.

i5«

Contexts ofa discourse

Indian; this passage and that from Horace quoted above both mention skincolour. Thirdly, as we have seen above, Marcian mentions Indian eunuchs

{spadones Indict) among the luxury goods from the east on which customs
duties must be levied. The same passage apparently refers to Indian hair
capilli Indict) imported for use in wigs; and it seems that ‘Indian hair’ was

('

used for the cirrus-type ‘Indian’ hairstyles reflected in a number of marble
heads of the Severan age (on which, see below in this section).
It is clear that this trade took place in the reverse direction as well.

The

Periplus makes it clear that slaves from afar were in demand on both the

Egyptian and Indian sides of the monsoon voyage. The Indian king at
Barygaza was an avid purchaser of singing boys and female concubines. 30
In an episode that may have taken place some two centuries earlier, Eudoxus

of Cyzicus on his third trip to India took with him a supply of young slave
musicians, along with doctors and artisans. 31 Indian literature contains

some references to western slaves, which may likewise have come from the
Greco-Roman world. 32 There are some indications in Han Chinese sources
that slaves were exported even farther east. 33 All of these instances suggest

a demand for slaves in the east. When the author of the Periplus speaks of

acquiring female slaves at the Horn of Africa (ocopaTa QqAuKd, 31), it is
possible that those slaves were to be sold farther down the African coast or on

the Indian subcontinent, rather than being returned to the Mediterranean
It is true that Nubia was the main source of ‘Ethiopian’ slaves
throughout antiquity, in a tradition stretching back into Egypt’s Pharaonic

world.

age. 34 Hence the purchase of slaves in Adulis and to its east in the Horn

should be seen as participation in a long-standing slave-trade in that area.
References in the Periplus to the slave-trade between the Red Sea and India
make it clear that slaves were traded along with other goods. This gives
a slightly unusual picture when we compare it with other evidence on
the slave-trade, which usually appears to be a separate sphere of economic
activity. 35

3°

31

32

pouotKa Kai irapSevoi eOeiSeTs irpos TraAAaKsiav (49).
pouaiKa iraiSiCTKapia Kai iaTpous Kai aAAous TEyvtTas (Strabo 2.3.4 C99).
E. H. Warmington, The commerce between the Roman empire and India, 2nd edn (New York: Octagon,

1974), p. 261.
33

Ying-shih Yii, Trade and expansion in Han China (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967),
p. 180.

34

On the continuation of the Nubian slave trade into the sixth-century ad, see R. H. Pierce, ‘A sale of
an Alodian slave girl: a reexamination of Papyrus Strassburg Inv. 1404’, Symbolae Osbenses 70 (1995),
159-64; cf. Stanley M. Burstein, Ancient African civilizations: Kush and Axum (Princeton: Markus

Wiener, 1998), pp. 118-20.
35

On the underdeveloped topic of ancient slave trades, W. V. Harris, ‘Toward a study of the Roman slave
trade’,

MAAR 36 (1980), 117—40; K. R. Bradley, Sbvery and society at Rome (Cambridge University

Press, 1994), pp. 31-56.

Commodities

159

Zy. Animals

India was identified with certain animals, but here the problem of exclusive
identification is extreme. Monstrous creatures such as winnowing fan-ears
(Otoliknoi), single-eyes (Monophthalmoi)

and shade-feet ( Skyapods) were

central to the earliest Greek descriptions of India.

’6

This element persisted

in western views right into the later Middle Ages, if we consider the fantastic

creatures that so define the outer edges of medieval world-maps. For the
present, let us concentrate on the less fantastic animals, ones that can be

understood with reference to modern zoology. A key text here is Aelian’s
Historia animalium, a work shared between fantastic and ‘normal’ animals

without making that distinction explicitly. Taking Aelian’s work as a central
text in the zoology of the early empire, the key question we must ask is to

what extent India emerges as a distinctive place.
Perhaps the most distinctively South Asian animal was the (Indian) elephant, Elephas maximus. It was much more widely diffused in antiquity
than it is today, when it exists only in India, Sri Lanka and a few parts of
southeast Asia. Its domestic use in the subcontinent is attested from the
early Indus valley site of Harappa; from the Early Holocene period the
animal was found through much of Asia, from Central China to the Syrian
coast of the Mediterranean, where it survived to about the seventh century
bc.

The problem of identification comes when we consider the African

elephant, Loxodonta africana, which is a separate genus, and frequently it is

impossible to know which of the genera is meant in any one particular representation. In other words, elephants may be distinctively Indian from a

zoological point of view, but not in the restrictive sense used in this chapter.

In fact, the difference between the two genera seems to have been of little
interest to ancient authors; Aristotle, who, in various works speaks in depth

about elephantine topics, from behaviour to inner organs, is apparently the
first clearly to refer to elephants from India .

37

By far the predominant use of elephants in the Greco-Roman world was
in the military. Their first and probably paradigmatic use was by Alexander
on his campaign in the Indus Valley. Such was the military-political cachet
attached to the animals that they appear on some of the coins minted by
Alexander, and even more so by his successors. While it may even have

been liability on the battlefield, the elephant thus became a symbol of
power among Hellenistic kings claiming continuity with Alexander. The
capture and use of elephants was one of the many ways in which Alexander
36

Milns, ‘Greek writers’; Romm, Edges pp. 83-92.

37

Arist. Cael. 298313; Hist. an. 6ioai5 clearly refer to the military use of elephants in India; Paus. 1.12.4.

,

On elephants in Aristotle, see Scullard, Elephant pp. 37-52.
,

160

Contexts ofa discourse

adopted and adapted the social practices he encountered on his campaign,
even though he was later to be thought of as a key agent for the transmission

of (Greek) culture. This latter phenomenon is central to Plutarch’s essay

On the fortune ofAlexander, but the tradition is much older. 38
The problem of identification may be summed up as follows: whereas the
ancient world’s most distinguished commander was associated with Indian
elephants, those known first-hand in the Roman world were by the law of

probability much more likely to have come from Africa, both north Africa,
that is the coastal stretch from Morocco through western Libya, and the

Horn of Africa. The elephants that were famously (and calamitously) taken
across the Alps by the Carthaginian commander, Hannibal, in 218 bc were
in all likelihood from the hinterland of his own territory.

Thus far we have been speaking of live animals. To judge from the
Periplus , they constituted a far smaller part of the eastern trade than animal

products; the text does not mention the exchange of live animals at all,

whereas it does mention such objects as ivory (49) and tortoiseshell (56).

When it does mention wild animals such as leopards, tigers, elephants,
huge serpents and monkeys (e.g., 50), it does so as a vague space-marker,
with perhaps a hint of danger, rather than with any suggestion that they
should be imported back to Egypt. In distinguishing here between animals

and their products, it is significant that the word elephas first occurs of
ivory;

it is

only later that it is used for the animal itself. 39 This suggests

that the animal initially came into Greek consciousness through its most

prized product, whereas the zoological interests of Aristotle and Aelian

came after the event. The use of ivory to depict elephants is common,
for example in the imperial diptych, and this is itself a case of synecdoche
combined with metonymy; in other words, the medium and the obvious
referent of the representation together enact the theme. This
ceit more readily associated with the

is

a con-

Wunderkammer of the early modern

period. 40
Yet, we do know that various animals considered Indian were known in

Rome in their living form. The city’s public spectacles, so much part of a
civic life from 186 bc and till the later Roman empire, produced a constant
38

39

Cf. Millar, ‘Looking east’, 515.
Ivory: Horn. II. 4.141; Od. 4.73; 8.404, etc. In a sixth-century bc inscription from Aegina the word

indicates an ivory statue: Supplementum Epigraphicum Graecum 32.356. For what seems the earliest

reference to the animal, see Hdt. 4.191, where the context makes it clear that it refers to the African
variety.

40

See in general Lorraine Park and Katherine Daston, Wonders and the order of nature, 1150-1750 (New
York: Zone, 1998), pp. 265-90. For the diptych, which shows either Julian or Antoninus Pius,
Scullard, Elephant, opposite p. 161.

Commodities

1 61

demand for exotic animals: in particular, staged hunts ( venationes) held
in the city’s

Colosseum and other amphitheatres. Fierce animals would

be pitched against each other or against specialised animal-fighting gladIn some cases, violent scenes from classical mythology
would be enacted, which might entail the devouring of a human, typi41
At the opening of the Flavian
cally a condemned criminal, by an animal.
Amphitheatre by the emperor Titus some 5,000 wild animals (and 4,000
domesticated) lost their lives; and when the emperor Trajan celebrated his
Dacian triumph in ad 107, 11,000 were killed in this way. The impressiveness of this practice in the eyes of viewers depended in large measure on
their exotic quality, their size and aggression, and hence the use of elephants,
bears, ostriches, crocodiles and the gamut of large cats. For many living in
Rome or other major cities, public spectacles would be the typical (if not
the only) way in which such wild animals could be seen in the flesh.
The ‘Great hunt’ mosaic at Piazza Armerina gives a vivid sense of the
capture and transport of animals, for exactly such purposes, we can reaiators

( bestiarii).

sonably suppose. Close to the centre is the depiction of an elephant being

coaxed onto a ship. However, given the proximity of Sicily to North Africa,

we can safely assume that this was an African elephant from ‘Libya’ rather
than an Indian. Indeed, there is no trace that elephants were transported

with the monsoon trade, and it is hard to imagine the practical difficulties
involved in such an operation. 42

More practicable for domestic consumption were birds. There are several
hints of a demand for parrots at Rome, and of the idea that they came from
India. The opening line of Ovid’s playful lament is typical: ‘Parrot, avian

imitator from India in the east, has died’

43
.

.

.

From the earliest classical

references to parrots to late antiquity, the birds are consistently and almost
exclusively linked with India. 44 They, too, conferred luxury status on their

owners, and it was a function of the emperor Elagabalus’ depravity that he
would eat parrots and feed them to the lions. 45

41

Cf. K. M. Coleman, ‘Fatal charades: Roman executions staged as mythological enactments’, JRS 80

42

On the comparable difficulties of transporting an elephant to the early sixteenth-century Papal court,

(1990), 44-73.

The Pope’s elephant (New York: Penguin, 2000).
Am. 2.6.1-2 Psittacus, Eois imitatrix ales ab IndisJ occidir, for other laments, Stat. Silv. 2.4 and Corpus
see Silvio A. Bedini,

43

Inscriptiorum Graecarum III, p. 1076. See also Petron. fr. 31. 1-2; Plin.

HN 10.117; Apul. Flor. 12.1-4,

etc.

44
45

The earliest reference is Ctesias, preserved in Phot. Bibl. 45334.
SHA Heliogab. 20.4; 21.1; cf. D. W. Thompson, A glossary of Greek birds (Oxford: Clarendon, 1895),
pp. 335-42;

O. Keller, Die antike Tierwelt 2 vols. (Leipzig: Teubner, 1920), vol. II, pp. 45-50;
,

G. Jennison, Animals for show and pleasure in ancient Rome (Manchester University Press, 1937),
pp. 15-20, 107-12.

162

Contexts ofa discourse

Figure io Ivory statuette found at Pompeii, first century bc, Museo Nazionale, Naples.

Commodities

163

Wild animals especially give the impression that it is much easier to
know about their consumption at Rome, while details of their capture and
importation are largely murky. That this should be so is due partly to the
fact that their social impact was greater the farther afield their origins were

deemed to be. In addition, when so many animals were required for a
single event, this impact was surely aggregative rather dependent on any
one of them. It is likely that some of the larger animals came from India, but
certainly nowhere near as many as will have come from ‘Libya’, the Horn
of Africa and the eastern Mediterranean. With parrots we are a priori on
safer ground in asserting both that there was a demand for them in Rome
and that long-distance networks responded to this demand. Nonetheless,
the problems of evidence presented here in no way deny the fact that India
was associated with wild animals in the minds of Romans.

1 6 Craft goods
.

Lastly,

.

we come to Indian craft goods found in the Roman world. The

pickings are meagre, for there is apparently only one artifact that can be

brought to the discussion. The fourth-century epigram mentioned above
does refer to a wine-goblet made in India, but for that there seems to be no
corroborating material evidence.

An ivory statuette depicting a young woman was found at Pompeii in
and is now in the Museo Nazionale, Naples (see Figure 10). She

1938,

stands naked, her head, neck, arms and legs richly adorned.

Her raised

arms indicate that she is arranging her hair. On each side she is flanked

by a smaller, child-like figure: these we may consider attendants, for they
appear to be carrying items for her to use in her toilet. A protrusion extends

from the left side of her head, as if a continuation of her hairstyle, and this
is presumably a key to any understanding of the purpose this artifact may
have served. Earlier scholars saw this as the handle of a mirror, but more
recently it has been considered instead to have been the leg of a small piece

of furniture. This is plausible, and better explains the fact that, apparently,
it

was intended to be viewed from three angles, if we take into account

the two smaller figures; and the vertical hole that extends from the top of

her head to the waist. It was found in one of the most densely populated
areas of Pompeii, the Via dell’Abbondanza, in a cache of fine craft goods.

The house in which it was found could easily have been that of a wealthy
merchant involved in long-distance trade, to judge from its architectural
plan.

164

Contexts ofa discourse

At 24 cm this is a small item, but distinguished by its fine craftsmanship;
the head was delicately carved, so that it exudes a sense of composure. The
earlier identification of the woman with Lakshmi, goddess of good luck,
46
fertility and prosperity, can now be dismissed as groundless.
But about
its Indian origins there can be no dispute, as its style closely matches the
statuary of the Satavahanas (first century bc to the third ad); in fact, two
closely comparable ivory statuettes have been found at Ter (Tagara) and
Bhokardan (Bhogavardhana) in India, and a brief inscription in Kharoshti
is found in the base. Nor can anyone doubt that it was brought to the Italian
peninsula by ad 79, the year in which an eruption of Vesuvius buried the
city of Pompeii and others.

Mary Helms’ comparative work, emphasising as it does craft goods over
raw materials, 47 might have led us to expect Romans to have had a vivid
sense of and even appetite for artifacts produced in distant places. But

given the nature of our evidence the phenomenon does not seem to apply
to Roman ideas about India. Clearly, no argument from silence here can be

strong, in light of the scattershot material record; nonetheless, the obser-

vation does resonate when we compare the very strong Roman predilection for things Egyptian, both in the importation of Egyptian obelisks to

metropolitan Rome’s most central civic spaces and a clear tendency to recreate elements of Egyptian style in its own art.

48

On the other hand, many

craft goods from the Mediterranean have been found on the subcontinent

(described in section III below). These have been the subject of intensive
investigation, much of which struggles with the issue of whether goods were

imported in their current form or produced locally, whether from local or

imported materials. In most of these cases we can merely speculate as to
the life-histories of individual artifacts. 49

This survey has consistently pointed to the power of rare commodities
Beyond that, India emerges as an origin of choice:
would be no exaggeration to say, in general, that Indian origins of any

to connote distance.
it

46

R. E. M. Wheeler, Rome beyond the imperialfrontiers (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1954), p. 135, lists
some of the various explanations that have been offered for the lengthy protrusion from her head;
cf. Sahai, Iconography of minor Hindu and Buddhist deities (Delhi: Abhinav, 1975), pp. 157—79.
47 Mary W. Helms,
Craft and the kingly ideal: art, trade, and power (Austin: University of Texas Press,
1993 )48

E.g., James Stevens Curl, Egyptomania: the Egyptian revival, a recurring theme in the history of taste

49

Cf. Arjun Appadurai (ed.),

(Manchester University Press, 1994); W. A. Macdonald and J. A. Pinto, Hadrian s Villa and its legacy

(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995).
The social life of things: commodities in cultural perspective (Cambridge

University Press, 1986), with especially the articles by Appadurai and Igor Kopytoff; also Chris

Gosden and Yvonne Marshall, ‘The cultural biography of objects’, World Archaeology 31 (1999),
169-78.

Commodities

165

particular item, whether real or imagined, added value to it in Roman eyes.

In very few cases can we say for certain that something would definitely have
come from the subcontinent, on the empirical grounds that it could not
have come from anywhere else. Pepper is the major exception here, and it is
an important one. In most cases what we see in practice is a variety of origins,
if we are cognizant of the botanical and other evidence. This conclusion

must impact on any attempt to see India through the lens of commodities,
and acts as a sober reminder of the indivisibility of the imaginary and
the real Indias. In sum, it is clear that the goods regarded by Romans as
distinctively Indian carried with them a sense of the exotic. Not all of them
were necessarily luxury goods in the normal sense of consumption, though,
if

we consider the presence of cotton in the monsoon trade and the medical

and religious uses of spices and aromatics.

II.

THE RHETORIC OF EXCESS

one thing to describe those goods that were considered ‘Indian’ by
Romans; it is another to assess the social meanings of these objects. It is
It is

this second task that has taken on some urgency in anthropological work

in the past twenty years or so: significant recent work has emphasised the

material quality of symbols, and conversely the symbolic aspects of material
culture.

50

It is

to the consideration of social meaning that we must now

turn.

The most important point to make is the resilience of a moral discourse
around economic issues in the Roman world. As early as the fifth century
bc, the Twelve Tables, the earliest codification of law in the still small-scale

Roman state, included steps to restrict the power of a ‘prodigal’ {prodigus)
over his property, as we know from a much later source ( Digest 27.10. 1 pr.

Ulpian, early third century ad). The so-called sumptuary laws of the mid-

second century bc limited the amount that could be spent on a dinner-party,
stipulating the kinds of food offered and the number of guests allowed.

51

The question of luxury engaged Hellenistic ethics, and we do know that it
was the topic of philosophical treatises that are now lost. 52
Of more immediate concern, we must note that luxury was part of a welldeveloped philosophy of the past, as is found in the historical monographs of
Sallust and in Livy’s History. Writing in the late republic and the principate,

50

Apart from the essays in Appadurai, Social life eminent archaeological studies are Ian Hodder (ed.),
The meaning of things: material culture and symbolic expression (London: Unwin Hyman, 1989).

51

The lex Fannia (161 bc), extended and revised by the lex Didia (143) and the lex Licinia (after 143).

52

Griffin, Latin poets , pp. 1—31.

,

1

66

Contexts ofa discourse

these writers particularly saw the progression of Roman history as a decline

from a glorious past, which valued good Roman virtues, the ‘custom of the
ancestors’ ( mos maiorum). They were writing at the time when Rome had

greater power over the Mediterranean than ever before, and when the supply

of luxury goods was larger than ever. For Sallust, it was the external threat

from the Carthaginians in the western Mediterranean that had constantly
honed Roman morality in the third and second centuries bc. This process

ended with Rome’s victory over Carthage in 146 bc, upon which that city
was destroyed: the date thus heralded the increasing hold of luxury and
avarice on their lives, and constituted a turning point in the tradition of

moral historiography that is seen in both Sallust and Livy. 53 For Livy as for
others, it was the presence of Roman troops in the eastern Mediterranean

that caused the rot to set in; the celebration of triumphs in the city brought

home foreign goods and values. Thus when Manlius Vulso celebrated a
triumph in 186 bc, ‘the beginnings of foreign luxury were brought to the
city by the army from the east’. 54

By a variation on this, Pliny dated the

onset of luxury in Rome to the conquest of Asia Minor. 55

The details of these analyses, which differ in the various texts, are less
important than a basic premise: that external military threat had a salutary
effect on the

Romans, and that Rome’s ascendancy had instead brought

about moral decline; or alternatively, that Roman troops in the eastern
Mediterranean world brought back with them a taste for luxury goods. In
either case the increase of luxury at Rome was viewed as an outside-inward

dynamic, whether that movement involved Roman soldiers on campaign
or commodities themselves.

This phenomenon can be understood in part by a figure that stood in
opposition to it, and came to epitomise Roman republican virtue. One of
the earliest works of Latin prose is the elder Cato’s treatise on farming, De
agri cultura: here farming represented the steadfast, old-fashioned Roman

values to which the later onset of luxury seemed profoundly antithetical.

The notoriously anti-Greek attitudes of Cato the Censor (234-149 bc)
were in part an act of opposition to the effeminacy ( mollitia) associated
with Greek culture: this is, however, not specifically a matter of commodities.

53

54

56

We have already seen that the Italic herbs mentioned here by Cato

Donald C. Earl, The moral and political tradition ofRome (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1967).
Livy 39.6.7: luxuriae
peregrinae origo ab exercitu Asiatico inuecta in urbem est. It is no coincidence
.

.

.

that this coincides broadly with Rome s success over the Carthaginians.
55

33.148-49; cf. A. W. Lintott, ‘Imperial expansion and moral decline in the Roman Republic’, Historia
21 (1972), 626-38, at 628.

56

Edwards, Politics of immorality pp. 92-7.
,

Commodities

1

67

formed the background against which imported, tropical spices seemed
like

luxury goods; more generally, farming, with its emphasis on cereals

and other staples, formed the backdrop of the long-distance trade in luxury
goods altogether 57 At a time when Rome’s dominance spread throughout the Mediterranean and made the metropolis more cosmopolitan, Cato
continued to stand for the republican ideal of good morals, grounded in
.

agriculture. In these terms, there is a temporal aspect to luxury goods; they

marked the modernity of the new cosmopolitan city and emerging world
empire; they distinguished the city of Rome from its golden age of hazy

memory, they are what made Rome’s past a ‘foreign country’ in the eyes of
a Sallust or a Seneca

58
.

Not only does the Roman imperial discourse about

luxury thus have a long heritage, but that discourse involves the creation

of a very particularised view of Rome’s past.

There is an aggregative aspect in Roman responses to commodities: part
of their social meaning comes, if not from their quantity, then from the
fact that they are densely combined. This emerges even from the lines of
Statius’ Silvae with which this chapter began, and can be illustrated in all the

moralists. In effect, this is how an Apician recipe might also be read, even

though of course the fact of combination has special reasons in a context of
cooking. This aggregative aspect is perhaps analogous to the social meaning
of a metropolis: a description of Rome, for example, by Juvenal presents
not one but several of its distinctive features closely combined, with several

of the senses engaged at the same time 59
.

There was in Greek and Roman texts a long tradition of talking about
luxury from the east. The first case concerns eastern Greeks of Asia Minor,
that is the Greek-speaking inhabitants of what is now the western coast of

Turkey 60 From the archaic Greek world, then, Lydia and its surrounding
area had connotations of vice and decadence. This applied not so much to
.

goods from Asia Minor as to its inhabitants’ lives. For the purposes of this
chapter, it might be said that this implied the construction of Asia Minor
as a place of luxury.

The key point is that this projected the practice of

luxury in an eastward direction, something that can be traced throughout
the rest of antiquity and even beyond. This tendency was never absolute,

57

Indeed, this is one reason that a balanced view of the Roman economy requires a reasonable assess-

ment of the proportional amounts involved between agriculture and trade, especially luxury trade:
see section IV below.
58

Cf. David Lowenthal, The past is a foreign country (Cambridge University Press, 1985).

59

See Nicholas Purcells twin articles, ‘The city of Rome and the plebs urbana in the late Republic’,

CAH, 2nd edn (1994), vol. IX, pp. 644-88; and ‘Rome and its development under Augustus and his
successors’,
60

CAH 2nd edn (1996), vol. X, pp. 782-811.
,

Leslie Kurke, ‘The politics of habrosune in archaic Greece’, Cl. Ant. 11 (1992), 81-120.

Contexts ofa discourse

i68

when for example the Italian (i.e. western) colony of Sybaris became for
Greeks a byword for decadence (e.g., Plutarch Life of Crassus 32); and when
Trimalchio’s poem thematising the indulgence of his dinner-party mentions Carthaginian jewels and ‘Numidian bird’

(i.e.

guinea-fowl), along-

side Babylonian gold and Indian pearls, North Africa fulfils the same role

(Petronius Satyrica 55, written before ad 66).
It is worthwhile to dwell for a moment on one of the Roman empire’s
most conspicuous consumers, the freedman Trimalchio. At his lavish
dinner-party he presents only the most exotic delights from various parts
of the world. As one of the more experienced guests tells the naive narrator,
Trimalchio serves only foodstuffs from his own estates:

You mustn’t think that he buys anything: everything grows on his own estates.
Wool, citrus, pepper; you can even have cock’s milk if you like. To crown it all,
his wool was not growing finely enough, so he bought rams from Tarentum sent
them to his flocks with a smack on the rear. He ordered bees to be imported from
Athens so Attic honey could be produced at his own home; and, by the way, Italian
bees will be improved by the Greek ones. And these last few days, in fact, he gave
61
instructions for mushroom-seed to be sent from India. (38.1)
It is significant to notice that in this passage the

mushrooms are not strictly

speaking from Trimalchio’s estate, but imported from beyond it. The distinction is strictly beside the point when, for example, ‘cock’s milk’ is clearly

exaggeration for comic effect. Nonetheless, they are deeply caught up in a

system of value where geographical distance brings social prestige, something alluded to also in the reference to the Athenian bees. The passage
is

central to the concerns of this chapter also because the consumption

involved is in the private sphere, and centred on the sumptuous dinnerparty.

The cultural politics are heightened by the fact that Trimalchio is

presented as the upstart, the crude social climber, who tries to compensate
for his low-prestige,

freedman status by the most conspicuous kinds of

consumption.

Of the commodities discussed above, we should examine two extreme
cases in greater detail, moving beyond a description of their existence in the

Mediterranean world to an analysis of their social meaning. Firstly, spices.
In section I, we have already noted the readiness of Roman literary sources
to use a moralising lens in considering pepper.

A case in point is Pliny’s

comments about the consumption of pepper (12.14). We must now step
61

nec est quod putes ilium quicquam emere. omnia domi nascuntur: lana, citrea, piper; lacte gallinaceum
si quaesieris, invenies.

ad summam, parum illi bona lana nascebatur: arietes a Tarento emit et eos culavit

in gregem. melAtticum ut domi nasceretur, apes ab Athenis iussit ajferri; obiter et vemaculae quae sunt,

meliusculae a Graeculis fient. ecce intra hos dies scripsit, ut illi ex India semen boletorum mitteretur.

Commodities

169

back and assess that bias in broader frame. What happens when we read
such passages against the grain?
Pliny says that the mixing of odorific forest substances to make the very
first

scent in time immemorial was done for the sake of luxuria

(13. 1).

However, it appears that, in his haste to criticise, Pliny seems to have got
it wrong: overwhelming evidence suggests that the earliest use of spices

was for incense and hence for the sake of worshipping the gods rather
than decadence. Any comparison with Theophrastus’ more dispassionate
On odours shows the prominence Pliny gives to his own concerns. As the

comments earlier in this section suggest, Pliny’s position can be understood
in terms of Rome’s new status in the Mediterranean world: a cosmopolitan
city at the centre of a world empire.

An implicit contrast should be detected in the rhetoric about spices: that
with the earlier Roman cuisine as described by Cato in De agri cultura.

Here there is no reference to pepper or other imported spices, though Cato
does mention myrtle berries as flavouring (101.1) These we would call herbs
rather than spices: they were domestic rather than imported, and carried no
.

connotations of luxury. The difference between the world of Cato and that

of Apicius was, in part, one between modest Italian-grown herbs on the

one hand and exotic eastern spices on the other, or so Pliny would have us
believe. This latter, more commodity-conscious world of the early empire
is vividly presented

by Petronius in the form of Trimalchio’s dinner table,

not least the host’s insistence that the gourmet delicacies served come from
his own estates.

One feature in Pliny’s books on spices may offer a clue to their social
meaning in his world, namely the consumption of spices by Persian kings.
As we have seen, there is a long tradition in Greek thought of Persian
luxury, going back to Herodotus’ Histories but the key point here is Pliny’s
,

emphasis on the fact that the Achaemenid court received a huge amount
of spices from Arabia annually (12.80). In this way, Pliny’s ‘east’ harboured

both the production and the consumption of spices, and for that matter
the distribution also. And this meant, by implication, that any Roman to
indulge in spices would be partaking in the morally dubious ways of the
east.

Let us take a moment to consider the idiomatic uses of spice.

62

When

one Safinius is referred to in Petronius’ Satyrica as ‘pepper rather than
a person’ (44.7: piper non homo), we see that the sharpness of the spice
62

Here it can be noted that Christian idioms and moralistic vocabulary are not substantially different
to polytheist; in other words, there seems no specifically Christian concept of spices: Lallemand and
Dittmann, ‘Gewlirz’, RAC vol. X.1201-7.
,

Contexts ofa discourse

170

gave it idiomatic force: ‘wherever he went, the earth caught fire’. Here
it is interesting, in passing, to compare the idiomatic uses of salt: this
sometimes serves as a spice when it is a condiment used for flavouring

the good, though its potential utility goes far beyond that, and in modern

times it is customary to refer to salt and pepper as a pair. Some recipes
attributed to Apicius require salt in order to season meat (e.g. 1.5.1; 1.9.1),
and this reveals its use in Roman cuisine. The interesting point about it,

however, is that the word is related to the Latin word for health, salus. The
word for salt occurs also in idioms, not unlike pepper, but its metaphorical
use is more deeply embedded in the Latin language than that of pepper. 63

This difference between the rhetoric of the two seasonings may be taken
as symptomatic of the fact that salt was used in the Mediterranean since

prehistoric times, long before pepper.

Secondly, silk too deserves special consideration. This was the luxury
fabric par excellence, and we find it referred to in morally coded and often
gendered language. The Latin name for silk in love elegy, ‘Coan robes’, is
virtually a byword for hedonism, notably in Propertius. 64 Another elegist,

Tibullus, speaks of silk from
as the causes

Cos together with shell from the Red Sea

of greed on the part of young women

that in some cases silk

is

(2.4.29).

The fact
Coan

in such cases referred to merely as ‘the

garment’ or even ‘the Coan thing’ is an indication of the extent with which

product had become synonymous with place of production. Thus Ovid
can advise the would-be lover to be charmed with ‘Coan products’ if that
is

what he finds the beloved wearing. 65 In these cases silk is explicitly worn

by women; later references tell us about silk being worn by men, often
with connotations of sexual transgression. Under the emperor Tiberius the
Senate in ad 16 forbade men from wearing silk (Tacitus Annals 2.33; Cassius

Dio Roman history 57.15), a stipulation ignored by Tiberius’ successor Gaius
(Caligula), according to the biographer Suetonius ( Life of Gaius 52.1). The
flamboyant later emperor Elegabalus (ad 218-22) is said to have worn only
silk,

which helped make him a kind of Liberace figure. 66 In fact, several

of the emperors represented in the biographies of the Historia Augusta
(probably from the late fourth century ad) are said to have worn silk: in
the case of Commodus, in order to hide a tumor in his groin from public
63

A. Otto, Die Sprichworter und sprichwortlichen Redensarten der Romer (Leipzig: Teubner, 1890).

64

The term Code uestes is used either in the singular or in the plural, as for example at Prop. 1.2.2;

63

An am. 2.298 sive erit in Cois, Coa decere puta\ cf. Hor. Carm. 4.13. 13.
SHA Heliogab. 26.1; cf. David S. Potter, ‘Odor and power in the Roman empire’, in Constructions

*• 3 - 53 ; 4 - 5 -S 7 -

66

of the classical body ed. J. I. Porter (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1999), pp. 169—89, at
,

178-9.

.

Commodities

171

view (13. 1). Given the negative disposition and gossipy nature of this work,
silk functions as an unambiguous marker of vice. It is no accident that all
three rulers mentioned here, Caligula, Elegabalus and Commodus, were

remembered as ‘bad emperors’, a status that typically carried with it tales
of sexual misconduct.
Silk is thus an object lesson in the problems involved in linking product

with its supposed place of origin: there was, it is clear, a particular social
meaning attached to the product involved; and there was a tendency to
link it with a place or places of origin. But this link remained vague, when

the elegists and other Augustan age writers associated it with the Greek
island of Cos; when its later name was closely tied with the name of China;

and when some texts, such as Pliny and the Periplus, do indeed link it
with India. In fact, we do know from the Periplus that several Indian ports
served as entrepots at which Roman merchants could acquire silk, so this

should certainly be considered a factor in the inability of Romans back in
the Mediterranean, on the consumer side of these transactions, to retain a
clear sense of provenance.

III.

TRADE NETWORKS AND THE LONGUE DUREE
III. I. Varieties of evidence

Now that we have seen a number of specific goods and the rhetoric with
which they are represented, it is necessary to step back to consider the
mechanics of exchange whereby they were conveyed from South Asia to the
Mediterranean. Thus far, consumption has been foregrounded: different
perspectives arise when we consider the productive and distributive parts

of economic practice.

The evidence to be considered in an overview of Roman trade with
Asia is necessarily varied in nature. First, the largest single class of evidence

comes from literary texts, of the kinds described above: as we have seen,
they are very much the products of their own thought worlds and therefore
of limited use in grasping the mechanics of exchange. Pliny’s Natural history

looms large among these texts, but there is also much to be gained from the
geographical texts of Strabo ( c 64 bc to after ad 21) and Claudius Ptolemy
(fl. ad 146-70). While geography and natural history provide the most
obvious genres for such study, texts in which ‘Indian’ goods are mentioned
in passing are also of enormous importance, not least for their lesser degree

on this specific topic. Expanding from the issue of
consumption for the moment, what of literary sources for larger patterns

of* self-consciousness

172

Contexts ofa discourse

of exchange? Apart from Pliny (6.104-6 and 12.84) mentioned below, there
information to be gleaned from Diodorus Siculus ( Bibliotheke 5.22-23)
and Strabo ( Geography 2.5.12 C118 and 17.1.13 C686). It may be noticed
is

that, with the partial exception of Diodorus, the Alexander historians are

notable by their silence on this subject. Claudius Ptolemy in his Geography

mentions several locations on the subcontinent, among them emporia, both

on the near and the far side of the Ganges (7.1 and 7.2 respectively). For
the later period, Cosmas Indicopleustes’ Christian topography shows us that

the Indian trade was pursued by Byzantines in the sixth century. 67

To adhere in a formal way to the category of literary sources, we come
to a work of the greatest significance: the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea.

The work survives in a single manuscript, now in Heidelberg, from the
beginning of the tenth century. 68 Opinions about the date of this work
have varied from about ad 40 to as late as 240. However, scholarly opinion
is

now largely united in dating the work to the period ad 40 to 70: the

decisive issue is the reference to the Nabataean king Malichus, who may

now safely be identified as Malichus II (reigned 40-70). 69 We know that
the anonymous author was an Egyptian Greek. 70 It is tempting to conclude
that the dating of the document to this period suggests that in these decades

the seaborne trade with India was still a relative novelty.

The value of the Periplus to our understanding of Roman long-distance
trade generally and of the India trade in particular is enormous.

When

literary sources so consistently denigrate the merchant as a social type, or

even social class, it is refreshing to have this insight into the perspective of a
trader.

On any reading, the enormously practical perspective of its author

shines through. Whereas Pliny speaks in generalising and moralising terms,

the Periplus author is centrally concerned with specific objects of trade at
specific places, and with the conditions of engaging in trade. From the text

67

68

See N. Pigulewskaja, Byzanz aufden Wegen nach Indien (Berlin: Akademie, 1969), pp. 110-29, on

Cosmas. Note evidence of the demand for silk in fifth- and sixth-century Byzantium, pp. 80—91.
This is Cod. Pal. Gr. 398. On the other hand, B. M. Add. 19391 fols. 9r— I2r, of the fourteenth
or fifteenth century is merely a copy of the Palatine ms, adding no independent witness. It is
accompanied by other geographical works. The work has often been printed, first in 1533: see

Wilfred Schoff (ed.), The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea: travel and trade in the Indian Ocean (New
York: Longmans, 1912), pp. 17-19, with Casson, Periplus pp. 5-6, for details.
69
These dates are secure from Nabataean king-lists, and may be taken as the termini of the Periplus.
,

On the dating see Raschke, ‘New studies’, 979-81 nn. 1342-6; with G. W. Bowersock, Roman Arabia
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1983), pp. 70-2, for the Nabataean context, followed

by Casson, Periplus, pp. 6-7. Furthermore, a first-century dating seems now to be confirmed by
Indian history: P. J. Turner and J. E. Cribb, ‘Numismatic evidence for the Roman trade with ancient
70

India’, in The Indian Ocean in antiquity, ed. Julian Reade (London: Kegan Paul,
1996), pp. 309-20.
At section 29 he speaks of ‘the trees we have in Egypt’; consistently he offers Egyptian equivalents

for Roman months. See Casson, Periplus, pp. 7—10.

Commodities

173

we get an acute sense of the dangers involved, e.g. pirates, winds, hostile
competitors. The plain, sometimes repetitious language used is yet another
indication of its pragmatism, free of stylistic considerations. Reading it is

much like overhearing a conversation between sea-captains and merchants.
Literary evidence from the south of India has much light to shed on this
topic. The presence of ‘Yavanas’, which would seem at first blush to refer
to ‘Greeks’ specifically, is attested in Tamil poetry:

Here lies the thriving town of Muchiri (sc. Muziris), where the beautiful large
ships of the Yavana come, bringing gold, splashing the white foam on the waters
of the Periyar, and then return laden with pepper. Here the music of the surging
sea never ceases, and the great king presents to visitors the rare products of sea and
mountain.

Another poem mentions the ‘cool and fragrant wine brought by the Yavana
in their good ships’. In both cases, the Periplus would seem to receive
outside verification as regards the cargo of Greek ships. There are, however,

two problems here: first, it is not certain that the ‘Yavanas’ are Greeks
71
There is no mistaking
rather than ‘westerners’ in a more general sense.
the terminological link with ‘Ionians’: one can compare the term ‘Yonas’ in
72
But some doubt still looms over the specificity with

Ashoka’s inscriptions.

which the term was applied, as if in the same way as the term Firnngi was
used by Arabs in the high Middle Ages to refer to all (western) Europeans,
not merely Franks. 73 Then there is the problem of dating the work. Subject
to a lengthy oral tradition, it is possible that the work goes back to the
might
first century ad, but it is impossible to say so with any certainty: it
equally well have been written several centuries later.

Secondly, there are a number of documentary sources. The so-called
(/? Vind. G40822 of the mid-second century ad, now

Muziris papyrus
in Vienna)

was not published till the 1980s. 74 It presupposes a contract
between two parties concerning the transport

that had been concluded

71

72

Wheeler, Imperialfrontiers, p. 178, for one, suggests that the term may have been used also for Arab
traders, about which the poems otherwise have nothing to say.
For various compounds vnt\\ yona- in the Rock and Pillar edicts, see A. C. Woolner, Asoka: text and
glossary (Oxford University Press, 1924), p. 126.

Yavana is a back formation from the Prakrit Yona,

and came to be used for various trading peoples from western Asia, including Arabs in subsequent
centuries: Thapar, ‘Asokan India and the Gupta age’, in A cultural history ofIndia, ed. A. L. Basham
(Oxford University Press, 1975), pp. 38-51, at 44. Further comparisons may be drawn for loanwords
iamanu
for ‘Greeks’ in other languages: Hebrew yavan (pi yavanim)'. Old Persian yauna\ Assyrian
speaks
(or iavanu); Egyptian Y'-v“n-(n)a. A Jewish source probably from the early sixth century bc
.

of Greeks (Yavan) as traders: Ezek. 27:13, in the lamentation over the fall ofTyre.
A. Miquel (ed.), Us&ma Ihn Mundiqh, des enseignements de la vie (Paris: Colin, 1983), pp. 57-65.
74 H. Harrauer and P. Sijpesteijn, ‘Ein neues Dokument zu Roms Indienhandel, P. Vindob. G40822
73

Anzeiger der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenchaften, phiL-hist. KL 122 (1985), 124-55.

,

Contexts ofa discourse

174

of goods from Muziris (probably modern Cranganore) to Myos Hormos

on the north-eastern coast of the Red Sea (perhaps Quseir al-Qadim), 75
in particular a loan to be paid
itself sets

back on the return voyage: the papyrus
out the consequences of non-repayment. Whereas the Periplus

suggests that traders would mix low-cost everyday items within its cargo of

predominantly luxury goods, the Muziris papyrus is limited to expensive
In fact, the extremely high value of the cargo here described is
something to which we shall have to return in section IV below.
articles.

In addition, a number of inscriptions survive testifying to the kind of
trade mentioned by Pliny. Annius Plocamus’ freedman left two inscriptions
at the Wadi Menih on the Berenike-Koptos road, both of them dating to

the year ad 6: 1 Lysas, freedman of Publius Annius Plocamus, came here
on 2 July (5 July), ad 6.’ 76
,

Excavations at Quseir al-Qadim beginning in the late 1970s turned up

two ostraka inscribed in the southern India’s Tamil-Brahmi script. These,
which contain the names Kanan and Catan, have been dated to the first
century ad. Amidst a find of pottery that can be dated to ad 60—70, the
Berenike excavation has also produced two ostraka inscribed in Tamil-

Brahmi. 77
Archaeological finds constitute the third and most problematic category
of evidence. South Asia itself has produced a variety of evidence, particularly
from the southwest coast (known variously as Limyrike, the Malabar Coast
and Kerala), and the southeast coast (the Coromandel coast or Tamil Nadu);
likewise the Red Sea coast, and especially the Egyptian port of Berenike. 78

75

Myos Hormos used to be located at Abu-Sha ‘ar until excavations (1987-93) suggested that it was
not settled until the third century ad, thus invalidating the identification: Talbert, Barrington atlas

map 78 D3 and 80 Ei, with Young, Rome's eastern trade, pp. 40-4, and Donald Whitcomb, ‘Quseir
al-Qadim and the location of Myos Hormos’, Topoi 6 (199 6), 747-72.
76

Auoas FTottAiou ’Avvlou TTAoKapou f|Kcp AAe Kaioapos l-rreitj) rj (2 July), and LysaP.Anni Plocami
veni anno XXXV III non. IuL (5 July). The twin inscriptions were initially published by D. Meredith,
‘Annius Plocamus: two inscriptions from the Berenice road’, JRS 43 (1953), 38-40; cf. Federico de
Romanis, Cassia cinnamomo ossidiana. Uomini e merci tra Oceano indiano e Mediterraneo (Rome:
Bretschneider, 1996), pp. 211-12. The term kaisaros in the Greek version points to Augustus, hence

the dating. As it happens, this Lysa(s) corresponds with the freedman of Annius Plocamus, who

mentioned at Pliny 6.84 as a collector of taxes along the Red Sea coast. See further Federico de
Romanis, ‘Graffiti greci da Wadi Menih el-Her. Un Vestorius tra Coptos e Berenice’, Topoi 6 (1996),
is

731 -45 77

I. Mahadevan, ‘Tamil-Brahmi graffito’, in Berenike
199s: preliminary report of the 199y excavations at
Berenike (Egyptian Red Sea coast), ed. S. E. Sidebotham and W. Z. Wendrich (Leiden: CNWS,

1996),

pp. 206-8.
78

For a recent summary, see W. Z. Wendrich et al., ‘Berenike crossroads: the integration of infor-

mation

,

JESHO 46.1 (2003), 46—87. Site reports have been published regularly, beginning with

S. E. Sidebotham and

W. Z. Wendrich (eds.), Berenike 1994: preliminary report ofthe 1994 excavations

at Berenike (Egyptian Red Sea coast) (Leiden:

CNWS, 1995).

Commodities

175

By contrast, the Nile Valley itself has almost nothing to offer; 79 and, as we
have seen above, the archaeological yield from Italy itself has been extremely
scant.

80

Various kinds of material have been found: pots and amphorae,

bronzeware, and coins. The best-known Indian site is that of Arikamedu,
it was excavated by the British archaeologist Mortimer
Wheeler in the years 1944-48; but more recent work has challenged his

in part because

analysis that this may be viewed as a Roman settlement.
It is

81

in respect to glassware that archaeology and the Periplus are most

closely compatible. In the Periplus we hear of three different sorts: coloured

or millefiori-type glass
82

(49, 56).

and unworked glass

(6, 7, 17), glass vessels (39)

Many different kinds of glass beads were found in the 1967

excavations at Ter (Tagara of the Periplus ), and many of its items have been

dated to the first century ad. Glass vessels tended to be imported to the

northwest of the subcontinent, whereas southern India received a greater
proportion of raw glass, in the form of ingots. Much of this was destined
for Indian bead industries in the Deccan and in the south of India,

83

but

some may have found its way farther east to China. Finds at Arikamedu
reveal a specialised glassworking industry there.

Predictably, the

84

most plentiful Greco-Roman material remains to be

found on the subcontinent have been amphorae. The majority of those
found at Arikamedu carried wine, others olive oil or the fish-sauce called
garum. 85 On a recent assessment these are thought to be of the first century

79

Richard Alston, ‘Trade and the city in Roman Egypt’, in Trade, traders and the ancient city ed. Helen
,

Parkins and Christopher Smith (London: Routledge, 1998), pp. 168-202, at 194.
80

It is

striking how

little

of obviously Indian origin has been found in the Mediterranean world,

compared with Greco-Roman finds in India and Egypt. One factor to be taken into account is that
archaeologists who have worked in the subcontinent (e.g., Mortimer Wheeler and John Marshall)
came to their Indian work with a background in classical archaeology, and were thus quick to
recognise Greco-Roman artifacts when they encountered them; not so the reverse. On Wheeler in
India see Jacquetta Hawkes, Adventurer in archaeology: the biography of Sir Mortimer Wheeler (New
York: St Martins, 1982), with reference also to his memoirs.
81

M. P. Charlesworth, Trade routes and commerce of the Roman Empire 2nd edn (New York: Cooper
,

Square, 1970), p. 131; Vimala Begley, The ancient port ofArikamedu: new excavations and researches,

1989-1992 (Pondichery: Ecole fran9aise d’ Extreme-Orient, 1996), p. 6.
82

For a comparable range of glass material found on the African side of the Periplus trade, see
E. M. Stern, ‘The glass from Heis’, in Sur les routes antiques de TAzanie et de TInde. Le fonds
Revoil du Musee de I’Homme (Heis et Damo, en Somalie), ed. J. Desanges, E. M. Stern and P. Ballet
(Paris: MAI, 1993), pp. 21-61.

83

E. M. Stern, ‘Early Roman glass from Heis on the north Somali coast’, in Annales du io

e

Congres de

TAssociation pour THistoire du Verre (Amsterdam: AHIV, 1985), pp. 23—36, at 33.
84

E. M. Stern, ‘Early Roman export glass in India’, in Rome and India: the ancient sea trade , ed. Vimala

Begley and Richard D. De Puma (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1991), pp. 113-24.
85

E. Will, Les Palmyreniens.

Venise des sables (Paris: Colin, 1992), p. 150.

A detailed recent study of

terra sigillata at Arikamedu concludes that its remains originated in different production centres in

176

Contexts ofa discourse

ad, though they had earlier been considered somewhat later in date. 86 The

same can be said for Berenike, where pots have been shown to come from
as far west as Spain. In addition, several terracotta oil lamps of the early

imperial period have come to light at Arikamedu and Ter in the Indian
interior.

A somewhat different picture emerges from Begley’s study of Indian
ceramics on the subcontinent, 87 and this is introduced here to complicate

an otherwise clear picture. On the basis of two types of ceramic finds,

namely rouletted ware from the northwestern coast and mouldmade ware
from the southeast, 88 she suggests that the Coromandel coast traded with
the Mediterranean as early as the second century bc, that is some two
hundred years before the Periplus. But this must be taken with some caution,
as the only apparent grounds for viewing these ceramics as

evidence for

Greco-Roman trade is that they ‘show clear influence of classical ceramic
techniques and styles’. 89

The inland site of Kolhapur has yielded a cache of 102 bronzes. 90 This is
a great windfall: the value of bronze is such that it is prone to melting down

and reuse. At least ten are Roman imports, including mirrors, stands and
lamps, whereas the rest are more likely Indian in origin. Most famous is
the statuette of Poseidon, 12.8 cm high and finely crafted. 9 The Kolhapur
museum alone offers also jugs (Millingen-type oinochoe), basins, strainers,
mirrors and a delicate calithiscus (cup) made of bronze. But just how
much of this was imported from the Greco-Roman world, and how much
'

produced locally? 92 In the case of artifacts such as the Poseidon, the emblema
the Mediterranean world: Howard Comfort, ‘Terra sigillata at Arikamedu’, in Rome and India ed.
Begley and De Puma, pp. 134-50.
,

86

Will, Palmyreniens, pp. 154-5, places the ceramic finds in the first century bc and the first ad, whereas
since Wheeler it has been customary to date them to the first two centuries ad. She has found no

87

clear evidence pointing to the second century.
Vimala Begley, ‘Ceramic evidence for pre-periplus trade on the Indian coasts’, in Rome and India

,

ed. Begley and De Puma, pp. 157-96.
88

The best examples of these ceramics are stamped bowls, footed cups and dishes from Arikamedu,
and they differ markedly with finds from the northwest. The ceramic types of the two groups
are not related to each other, hence Begley’s conclusion that, while both regions traded with the

Mediterranean world, they did not have contact with each other.
89

Begley, ‘Ceramic evidence’, in Rome and India ed. Begley and De Puma, p. 157.

90

On the problems of identifying this site, see Richard Daniel De Puma, ‘The Roman bronzes from

,

Kolhapur’, in Rome and India ed. Begley and De Puma, pp. 8z—112, at 82.
,

91

Kolhapur Museum inv. 932. It may be considered a copy of a lost original by Lysippus ( c 340 bc),
and can itself not be exactly dated, nor can we exclude the possibility that it came to the subcontinent
.

92

much later.
De Puma, ‘Roman bronzes’, in Rome and India ed. Begley and De Puma. It might be noted here,
in passing and by comparison, that a substantial number of Roman bronze statuettes have been
,

unearthed in Frisia, another region ‘beyond the imperial
p. 52). This

frontiers’

(Wheeler, Imperial frontiers

may be taken as a reminder of the problem of the diffusion of artifacts.

,

Commodities

1

77

with Perseus and Andromeda, and the distinctive jug-handles, importation
seems probable, a priori, given the degree of similarity to artifacts in the

Mediterranean world itself. But not so for all the bronze finds. An interesting
case is presented by the three mirrors, which despite overall similarity exhibit
features not matched in any Roman mirrors thus far found.

93

In general,

the bronzes point to the Satavahana period (first to third centuries ad) but

do not suggest any more specific a date for trade contact.
Coins are the final and most complex class of Greco-Roman goods to
be found in India. 94 Hoards have been found at an astonishing variety
of locations throughout the subcontinent, particularly but not exclusively
in the south. In the 1980s coins were found on the Laccadive Islands:
this appears to

be a first ‘shipwreck’ hoard, i.e. one reflecting the kinds

of coin in the condition in which they were imported from the west, and
as such particularly valuable. These finds are still being examined, but
initial indications are that this hoard contains a

much higher percentage of
95

Republican coins than anything yet found on the subcontinent.
96
The known hoards have usefully been classed into three sections. First,
the early Julio-Claudian silver hoards, e.g. those found in the Coimbatore
district.

These exhibit only a small number of types, and are in fair to

good condition, suggesting that they were carefully selected and quickly
buried near centres of trade. Most of these date to the reigns of Augustus
and Tiberius. 97 Secondly, there are Julio-Claudian gold hoards. These reveal
greater diversity of types, and their state of wear depends on the composition
of the hoards: they vary in condition between worn (that is, much used) and
new. Tiberian and Claudian types predominate, thus making them slightly
later. Thirdly, there are second-century gold hoards, which are mostly in
98

good condition. Antoninus Pius and Septimius Severus feature large.
The relative absence of Republican coins is accentuated by a sudden
influx of Augustan and Tiberian denarii this suggests a sudden surge in trade
:

93

[)e Puma, ‘Roman bronzes’, in Rome and India ed. Begley and de Puma, pp. 98—100.

94

A general problem in the use of coins as historical evidence

,

is

germane here: how long had the coins

been in circulation before being buried in hoards? Given that we are dealing with a region outside
the Roman world, it is a genuine question, for that matter, whether coins were used at all.
95

96
97

Ball, Rome in the east, p. 127.
P. J.

Turner, Roman coins from India (London: Royal Numismatic Society, 1989).

For the Tiberian context, see Cosmo Rodewald, Money in the age of Tiberius (Manchester University
Press, 1976), esp. pp. 29-51.

98

A staggering number of Roman coins have been found in Sri Lanka, perhaps many times the number
of finds on the subcontinent itself. But they are far from fully published and have thus far received
relatively little attention from scholars, the exceptions being Weerakkody, Taprobane pp. 151-70;
,

Osmund Bopearachchi and Wilfried Pieper, Ancient coins from Sri Lanka (Turnhout: Brepols, 1998);
Kenneth W. Harl, Coinage in the Roman economy (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996),
pp. 290-314.

i7»

Contexts ofa discourse

in the latter part of Augustus’ reign. This at least has been the orthodoxy

for some time, and may be revised in the light of the new Laccadive islands,

which reveal both a greater number of Republican coins and a wider variety
of Augustan types than had hitherto been seen. About this there remain

many questions. What is clear is that the Julio-Claudian period saw a
transition from silver to gold. It is possible that local traders lost confidence
in the denarius ." What is puzzling is that this switch took place before
Nero’s debasement of the currency in ad 64, so that it does not seem as if

the switch was occasioned by the debasement. 100 At any rate, gold replaced
silver, which is not found after that point.

A feature of the Roman coins found in India

is

that many have been

slashed, whereas others have two punch-marks. This is true for two silver

hoards, namely those at Akenpalle and Nasthullapur. Punch-marks are

found also on the terracotta figures resembling coins, which were
most likely produced locally as imitations. 101 It is not easy to explain why
to be

they have received this treatment. Given the locality of the finds, Buddhist
practices may have played a part, it has been argued. Possibly, the punch-

marks suggest use as jewellery. 102 Economic explanations have also been
advanced, namely that the silver coins were marked so as not to interfere
with the new Indian coinage, the Satavahana silver of around ad 70—90;
or to disqualify them from returning to the Mediterranean. This complex
issue has been subject to much speculation and is far from resolved.

III.2.

Chronologies, personnel and routes

How are we to understand the dating of these exchanges? The literary
sources discussed above point overwhelmingly to the first and second centuries ad as the high point of commerce. The key documents bear this out,
namely the Periplus of the mid-first century ad and the Muzuris papyrus

of the mid-second. The archaeological record presents many complications
of detail, but even here it is possible to detect a similar centre of gravity.
For one thing, finds of Roman coins have generally reflected this pattern,

though new finds tend to give increasing prominence to Republican coins.
59

By contrast, Sidebotham, Roman economic policy p. 30, suggests that the Roman government may
,

have restricted silver exports but not gold.
100

101

102

Nero reduced the aureus from 1/42 to 1/45 of a pound, and the denarius from 1/84 to 1/96 the
amount of silver.
See, e.g., Wheeler, Imperialfrontiers , plates xxviii and xxix for Tiberian examples.

Certainly the practice of turning coins into jewellery was known in the Roman world, as was its
reverse: see Christopher Howgego, ‘The supply and use of money in the

ad 300 \JRS 82 (1992), 1-32, at 9.

Roman world 200 bc to

Commodities

179

There are obvious reasons why we should be faced with this basic chronology. The Pax Romana that began with Augustus’ victory over the forces of
Antony at Actium in 31 bc brought an end to decades of civil war and made
possible an ease of long-distance commerce that had earlier been impossible.

But it was even earlier, in 65 bc, that Pompey quashed piracy in the

eastern Mediterranean, and turned Nabataea into a client state of Rome.

This fact serves as a reminder of the economic implications, if not impetus,
of military initiatives. It does not, of course, tell us anything about state
initiatives per se. To take a later instance, we might consider L. Aelius Gallus
103
The story of his ill-fated expediwas prefect of Egypt about 25-24 bc.
tion into Arabia recorded by Strabo, who claims he was misdirected and

otherwise deceived by the epitropos Sullaios.

104

Strabo suggests that there

are economic motives to the expedition, stemming from tales of wealth of
IOS

Arabia and this has, plausibly, won acceptance from modern scholars.
From the early third century, we have Herodian’s account (4.10.4) of a
remarkable proposal of the emperor Caracalla to the Parthian king, Artabanus V: the unity of our two empires, he says in a letter that proves to be
a ruse, would be a great boost for the exchange and consumption of luxury
goods. There is no reason to take this remarkable episode at face value,

and it is perhaps no accident that the Roman emperor involved is known
to have been a keen imitator of Alexander.

106

All of these accounts give a

political-military edge to the story of long-distance exchange, particularly

around the time of Augustus. While their relevance cannot be denied, it
such
is important to put them into perspective by emphasising traces of
exchange before and after the Pax Romana.
The Ptolemies may have taken measures to control the Red Sea itself,
including the establishment of Berenike and other ports, but they do not
appear to have developed long-distance trade of the scale involved here.

This at least is the orthodoxy, and it is not entirely wide of the mark. But a
few qualifications must be aired. As early as the second century bc we hear
107

of commercially motivated travel to ‘spice lands’, which may be India.
The picture is considerably complicated by the possibility that Arab and
1

A 179.

103

Prosopographia Imperii Romani

104

16.4.22-24 C780-782. Gallus receives brief mention also at 2.5.12 C118 for ‘opening up’ Arabia to
Roman geographical knowledge through military conquest.

105

Cf. Cass. Dio 53.29.3-4; Bowersock, Roman Arabia pp. 46-9.

106

For a discussion of Herodian’s anecdote, Otto Kurz, ‘Cultural relations between Parthia and Rome’,

,

Cambridge History of Iran, ed. Ehsan Yarshater (Cambridge University Press, 1983), vol. III.i,
York: Praeger, 1967), pp. 171-2.
pp. 559-60; Malcolm A. R. Colledge, The Parthians (New
imitation of Alexander on the part of Roman emperors, see Chapter 5, sections I.5-6 below.
107
Ulrich Wilcken, ‘Punt-Fahrten in der Ptolemaerzeit’, Zeitschrift fur agyptische Sprache und Alterin

On

tumskunde 60 (1925), 86-102.

180

Contexts ofa discourse

Indian traders acted as intermediaries. 108 Furthermore, among the various
theories advanced in antiquity about the ‘discovery’ of the monsoon route

between the Red Sea and India, two point to the Ptolemaic period (see
section V.i below).

The issue of continuities between the Hellenistic and Roman periods is
an important one. In the most obvious sense, the port of Berenike was a
109

Ptolemaic foundation.
Yet it seems that the initiatives of the Ptolemaic
period were aimed at control of the Red Sea (in the narrow modern sense),
rather than of the Indian Ocean trade. 110 The Periplus offers a revealing

comment on the port of Eudaimon Arabia, modern-day Aden, which had
fallen on evil days by the time he was writing:

Eudaimon Arabia, previously a fully-fledged city, was called Eudaimon (‘prosperous’) when it used to receive the cargoes of both India and Egypt, since ships from

India did not venture as far as Egypt and those from Egypt did not dare sail to
farther destinations but came only this far, just as Alexandria receives goods from

distant lands as well as from Egypt. (26) 111

The suggestion here that there was trade activity predating the Periplus is a
significant one, and one that adds resonance to Strabo’s comment at 2.5.12

C118, that the Roman takeover of Egypt boosted trade with India.

It is

important to note the Periplus author’s reference to ‘vessels from India’: it
is

quite possible that these were Arabian or Indian vessels rather than ones

from Egypt.

The picture becomes even more complicated when we consider the other
large Hellenistic kingdom, that of the Seleucids.

Now there are a number

of signs that the Seleucid empire pursued some trade contact with India,

and this points us toward alternatives to the monsoon route. It is after all
true that the Periplus shows no more than a most rudimentary knowledge
of the Gulf. Seleucid commercial exploitation of Failaka and of Dilmun

had roots in earlier trading patterns involving Mesopotamian peoples. 112 In
fact, this is the point at which

108

109
110
111

we must consider trade in the Arabian Gulf in

Raschke, ‘New studies’, 637-50, accords a prominent role to intermediaries.
Pliny (6.168) tells us that Ptolemy II Philadelphus founded Berenike in his mother’s honour.
Sidebotham, Roman economic policy.

euSaipcov 5e ETtEKAf|6p, npoTEpov oucta ttoAis, ote, pfinco cato Tfjs IvSiKps e!s ti)v Aiyunrov
'

SpX°U£Vcov pt|8e atro Aiyutrrou toApcovtcov eIj tous ectco tottous SiaipEiv aKh aypt Tatnris
TTctpayivopEvcov, tous Ttapa apcpOTEpcov <|>6pTOUs cnreSeyETo, monsp 'AAEfjccvSpeia Kai tcov
e£co6ev Kai tcov cnro ttis Aiyunrou <|>EpopEvcov crrroSEXETai. Compare this passage with Plin.

HN 12.82-88.
112

Salles, ‘The Arab-Persian Gulf under the Seleucids’, in Hellenism in the East
Amdlie Kuhrt and Susan Sherwin-White (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987),

Jean-Franpois

,

ed.

pp. 75-108.

Commodities

181

a slightly broader compass. This is something that helps put the monsoon

trade in perspective, but not without adding problems of its own. Excavations undertaken since the 1950s in Bahrain (Dilmun of ancient Sumerian

sources) suggest that trade activity in the Arabian Gulf reached a high point
in the period around 3300-2200 bc. The island acted as a clearing house
for exchange involving the Mesopotamian and Indus valley civilisations,

a role it lost only with the decline of India’s Harappan civilisation in the
early second millennium bc.

113

The first centuries of the first millennium bc saw expansion of trade
activity in the Gulf: there had been active trade links between India and

Mesopotamia or southern Iran under the Neoassyrians and Neobabylo114
Later still, the
nians, lasting at least through the Achaemenid empire.
Achaemenids and Seleucids maintained a naval presence in the Gulf to
support their entrepots. Rather than establishing a colonial settlement in
the usual sense, the Seleucids seem to have pursued a deliberate policy with

commercial objectives. 115
It is important here to see Seleucid

commerce as a continuation of earlier

activity in the Gulf. Its continued use into Roman times is something to

keep in mind, and prevents us from seeing the Periplus trade in isolation.
The Parthian stations of Isidore of Charax (early first century ad), not to

mention the archaeological record of sites such as Palmyra, must keep us
mindful that overland transport in the very period of the Periplus continued
to be an important alternative. The Gulf, together with the Euphrates
(for someone sailing upstream) provided an alternative route that then led

overland from Palmyra. This settlement in modern-day Syria is the only
definite ‘caravan city’ for

whom trade represents an entire raison d’etre.

116

There can be no doubt that it was a major commercial centre with various
trade-routes passing through it. Appian provides an instructive reference
to Palmyra in narrating the events of 41 bc ( Civil wars 5.9). Antonius sends
troops to plunder Palmyra: his motives are the enrichment of his soldiers,

113

R. H. Brunswig, A. Parpola and D. Potts, ‘New Indus type and related seals from the Near East’, in
Dilmun: new studies in the archaeology and early history ofBahrain, ed. D. T. Potts (Berlin: Reimer,
1983), pp. 101-15; Michael Rice, Searchfor the paradise island ( London: Longman, 1984), p. 8;
Crawford, Dilmun and its Gulf neighbours (Cambridge University Press, 1998), p. 141.

114

Harriet

Michael Rice, The archaeology of the Arabian Gulf, c. $000-32 3 bc (London: Routledge, 1994);
Zeit
cf. H. Schiwek, ‘Das Persische Golf als Schiffahrts- und Seehandelsroute in Achamenidischer

und in der Zeit Alexanders des Grossen’, Bonner Jahrbiicher 162 (1962), 4-97.
"s
116

Salles, ‘Arab-Persian Gulf, p. 98.

M. Rostovtseff, Caravan cities (Oxford University Press, 1932), had written in broadly similar terms
also of Petra and Gerasa (Jerash) in Jordan, and Dura-Europos on the Euphrates. This is subject
to critique by Millar, ‘Caravan cities’; cf. Will, Palmyreniens , pp. 57—102, esp. 78—81, and Young,

Rome’s eastern trade, pp. 136-86.

i

Contexts ofa discourse

82

says Appian, though he invents a pretext for the attack.

But in the event,

the Palmyrenes, forewarned, transported themselves and their goods to the
far side of the river, and from there protected themselves with their archery.

Of significance to us here is Appian

’s

gloss on the Palmyrenes, who ‘being

traders, bring Indian and Arabian goods from the Persians and distribute

them in Roman territory’. 117 Pliny (5.88) speaks of Palmyra as preserving
its own fortunes, given its economic role and its location in an interstitial
zone between the Roman and Parthian empires. It should thus be stressed
that the extensive use of the monsoon from the Augustan period onward
brought about a partial, not complete, change of trade-routes.
In late antiquity, Greco-Roman seaborne trade with India was to be
eclipsed by Axumite trade. It is the Periplus that offers the earliest reference
in

Greek literature to the city of Axum, at a stage when it had not yet

acquired its subsequent prominence:

On this section of the coast, facing [the island of] Oreine, the moderately sized
of Adulis is located twenty stades inland. From Adulis it is a three-day
journey to Koloe, 118 an inland city that is the first trading post for ivory, and from
village

there another five days to the metropolis itself, which is called Axum; all the ivory

from beyond the Nile is brought into it through what is called Kyeneion, and from
there down to Adulis. The large number of elephants and rhinoceroses slaughtered
all

inhabit the upland regions, though very occasionally they are also seen on the

coast around Adulis itself. (4) 119

The city of Axum emerges from the Periplus as the main commercial centre
of the Southern Red Sea basin. 120 From the later third to the seventh
century ad its power was to expand to such an extent that we can talk
about an Axumite kingdom. The fact that Axum began to mint its own
coins from the third century may well indicate its increasing economic selfdetermination.

121

Its high point

the conquest of Meroe.

122

came in the mid-fourth century following

Central to its power as an empire would be its

117

gpuropoi yap ovtes kohi^oucti |i£v ek FlEpacov Tdlv8iKa p Apa(3 ia, 8 iaTi 0 £VTat 8’ev TrjPconaicov.

118

This location does not fit well with Ptolemy’s reference to the city of Koloe (4.7.25): see further
Casson, Periplus

119

,

p. 106.

Kat kot’ auTpv Tpv ev Tp OpEivr) f|7TEipov atro crraSlcov eikocti tt\s 0 aAdcrCTps ecttiv p A8ouAi,
Kcbprj cjunnETpos, at})’ fjs eis nev KoAopv MEcroyEtov ttoAiv Kal rrpcoTov Eiitroptov tou eAe^ovtos

080s ECTTIV T)|JEpCOV TplGOV OCTTO 8 e TaUTpS EIS OCUTpV TpV ppTpOTTOAlV TOV ’A^CO|ilTT|V A£y6|i£VOV
aAAcov ppEpcov ttevte, e!s ov 6 ttocs £AE(J>as diro tou TTEpav toO NeiAou <J>£pETai 81a toO AsyopiEvou
KurjVEiou, ekeT0 ev 8e e!s ASouAi. to pev oOv oAov TrAf) 0os tcov <|>oveuom£vcov £AE<j>avTcov Kai
piVOKEpCOTCOV TTEpi TOUS OtVCO VEHETCTl TOTTOUS, CTTTaVlCOS 84 TTOTE Kat EV TCO TTapa 0 aAaCTCTCfV TTEpl

auT-pv Tpv A8ouAt 0 EcopoOvTai.
120

Burstein, Ancient African civilizations, p. 18.

121

Sidebotham, Roman economic policy, p. 47 n. 94.

122

Once Axum first circulated coins, in the third century, they used Greek as well as Sabaean and
Ethiopic, thus suggesting some degree of Hellenic influence.

Commodities

183

role in the Red Sea trade, a role it was finally to lose with the Arab conquest

of Egypt and the Near East. Kushite civilisation reached its apogee at much
the same time as the Periplus trade, that is in the first and second centuries
ad, as we gather from the archaeological record of its cult monuments and
royal pyramids

123
.

was thus not till somewhat later than the Periplus that

It

Axumite trade rises, stepping into the breach left by the decline in direct
Greco-Roman commerce.
This consideration of chronology shows that the first two centuries ad
indeed seem to have been a high point of commercial contact, but in the
limited sense of the

monsoon trade only, and in so far as traders from

Roman Egypt were undertaking the entire journey on their own. However,
every effort should be made to keep this in perspective, both by being aware

of traces of the participation of Arab and Indian traders, and particularly
of the phenomenon of ‘tramp trading’ (for which the Periplus itself gives
124
Furthermore, the monsoon should be seen in terms
extensive evidence ).
of much larger trade networks also, especially the Arabian Gulf route which
flourished in the third millennium bc and was also known to

Romans,

though not obviously to the Periplus author. Significant new work has
shown the degree of commerce between the subcontinent and southeast
Asia, something on which the Greco-Roman sources have relatively little
to say

.

125

The broader context of the eastern trade has implications for any

attempt to assess Roman experiences of the subcontinent, direct or indirect
(section V.i below).

IV.

COUNTING COMMODITIES, OR HOW TO
LIE WITH STATISTICS

The two best-known passages concerning Roman trade with the east are
to be found in Pliny’s Natural history. The first comes in the context of his
topographic discussion of the parts of the inhabited world, at a point when
he is discussing the Indian Ocean:

And it will not be inappropriate to set out the entire route from Egypt, now that
reliable information of it is available for the first time. It is an

important topic,

given that in no year does India drain off less than fifty million sesterces of our

123

Derek A. Welsby, The kingdom of Kush: the Napatan and Meroitic empires (Princeton: Markus
Wiener, 1998), esp. p. 199.

124
125

Pace Miller, Spice trade

,

p. 241,

who claims that ‘most of the Indian trade by sea was direct’.

Indian Ocean., ed. Reade; but see section v below for ancient information on the Bay of Bengal.

Contexts ofa discourse

184

empire’s wealth, sending back goods to be sold among us at a hundred times their
original cost. (6.101)

126

Pliny proceeds, after this passage, to describe the route taken by traders on
the way to India, on much the same lines as described in section III above:

they would sail down the Nile from Alexandria, cross the Eastern Desert,

then embark at one of two ports on Egypt’s Red Sea coast (6.104— 6). The
tone of this passage is neutral, and the reference to commercial activity
serves to underline the importance of the topic rather than undermine it;

but in a comparable passage elsewhere Pliny sounds a moralising note. 127

Here the discussion is about spices and their origin. Proceeding regionally,
Pliny is here covering ‘Happy Arabia’ (Arabia Felix, where the adjective in
the name carries connotations of fertility and prosperity too):

But the title ‘happy’ is still more appropriate to the Arabian Sea, for it is the source
of the pearls which that country sends us. And by the lowest count India, China and
the Arabian peninsula remove 100 million sesterces from our empire each year that is what our luxuries and our women cost us. For what fraction of these, I ask

you, now goes to the gods or to the underworld deities? (12. 84)' 28

Moral rectitude again emerges as the all-important lens through which
Pliny visualises the issues at hand. Nonetheless, this obvious insight cannot

exonerate us from considering in more strictly economic terms the implications of luxury consumption. Both passages contain numbers which are
potentially valuable evidence; in fact they have been used to support the

most divergent kinds of analysis. They have been dismissed as ideological
129
As a hypothesis, we might nonetheless still want to ask what
these figures, and indeed the undoubted reality of the trade as a whole,

projections.

mean for the Roman economy. Such a question obviously has implications
for any understanding of Pliny’s statements above; can they in any way be
used to write an economic history of Rome? The larger question concerns
the place of trade in the economy, long-distance trade in non-essential items

126

nec pigebit totum cursum ab Aegypto exponere, nunc primum certa notitia patescente: digna res, nullo
anno minus HS.\D\ [milia] imperii nostri exhauriente India et merces remittente, quae apud nos

127

Wallace-Hadrill, ‘The elder Pliny’, and Beagon, Roman nature. In the case of the second passage

centiplicato veneant.

Pliny’s negative attitude to the emperor Nero accounts for some of the animus shown:

Beagon,

Roman nature p. 191.
,

128

verum Arabiae etiamnum felicius mare est; ex illo namque margaritas mittit. minimaque computatione
miliens centena milia sestertium annis omnibus India et Seres et paeninsula ilia imperio nostro adimunt:
tanti nobis deliciae et feminae constant, quota enim portio ex illis ad deos, quaeso,

iam vel ad inferos

pertinet?
129

Thus Moses I. Finley, The ancient economy, 2nd edn (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985),
p. 132, influentially.

Commodities

185

being one subsection of trade tout court. It is worth stating the obvious here:
of the goods discussed in section I above, none is a subsistence item, and
there is every indication that high-value items predominated by far in the
eastern trade. Yet, one complication arises when we bear in mind that this

trade passed through Egypt, the breadbasket of imperial Rome. Within the

Mediterranean itself, the distribution of these luxury items will not have

been as easily distinguished from the bulk transport of staple products as
would have been the case in the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean.
There are several senses in which Pliny’s figures are a problem. One is that
the current archaeological record on the subcontinent provides nowhere
near the quantity of gold (or silver) coins suggested. Of course no great
conclusions can be placed on this fact in itself, especially when, as shown
above, some coin hoards have indeed been found and many still await scholarly examination. Secondly, it is clear from the Periplus that coins are among
the items exchanged in the eastern trade. Thus the major port of Barygaza
in the northwestern province of Gujarat offers a market for ‘Roman money,
gold and silver, which commands an exchange at some profit against the
local currency’ (49): these are listed among several items for import and
export. Further, the port of Bakare farther south is also listed as a major

importer of money, this being one of the items for which pepper and mala-

bathron would be obtained (56). As indicated above, it is possible that gold
and silver coins were melted down or otherwise used as bullion outside of
their original area of exchange; the fact that hoards were frequently slashed

or punched suggests they could have been disqualified from reintroduction
into the narrower Roman economy of the Mediterranean.

Perhaps the greatest pitfall in the attempt to make economic sense of this
trade is the error of enthusiasm, the tendency to overestimate its extent.

130

Reasons for such enthusiasm are not hard to find, when it suggests a model
of commercial activity much more glamorous than the exchange of the
staples, such as the ‘Mediterranean triad’ of wine, olive oil and wheat, the
first two of

which are especially well attested archaeologically. So the extent

of the luxury trade has enormous implications for any understanding of the
Roman economy: to emphasise the trade in commodities, at the expense of
staples, is to give ancient trade a modern aspect.

How much was the supply

of luxury goods driven by the demand at home? Did the state promote

and regulate the trade, or was it entirely in the hands of entrepreneurs
working in their own interest? When modern western economic practices
have been so intensively studied, with so much more evidence to hand,
130

Whittaker, ‘To reach out’, 20.

Contexts ofa discourse

i8 6

there are both advantages and dangers in adopting modern analyses in

order to understand premodern. All of these subsidiary questions impact

on the way in which we characterise ancient economic practices generally.
In sum, we are faced with two distinct questions: can we, and should we
separate ancient moralising from economics?
Self-evidently,

it

is

impossible to make sense out of statistics such as

Pliny’s without a broader context. The most recent comprehensive assess-

ment of the Roman imperial economy estimates the mint production at
around 170—200 million sesterces per annum, reaching about one-quarter
of the total budget of around 800 million sesterces.' 31 By this reckoning,
fully one-eighth of the total budget of the early empire was being siphoned

off to the greater Red Sea region — an improbably high percentage. But

here the Muziris papyrus offers valuable evidence, for the loan agreement
to which it refers states its total value at 1,154 talents and 2,852 drachmae

of silver, which would have amounted to a massive 7 million sesterces. 132
Strabo says, on the basis of his own experience, that 120 ships per year
would sail from the Red Sea port of Myos Hormos to India (2.5.12 C118),
a number that presumably would have increased hugely if other Red Sea
ports were included. Thus, even if these figures are not adjusted considerably,

they suggest that Pliny’s numbers at the start of this section are still

within the bounds of the possible.
Further, if the average annual income per head in the Roman empire

around Pliny’s time has been calculated at somewhat below 400 HS, then
the figures mentioned by Pliny are astronomical. On the other hand, the
same study emphasises the high degree to which wealth was concentrated
in the hands of a very small group: 6 00 senatorial families received some 0.6

per cent of the total personal income, and the top 3 per cent received between

20 and 25 per cent. 133 If we can thus conclude that a small number of Romans
were extremely wealthy, then Pliny’s numbers are not so unbelievable. His
high figures may thus be explained by the wealth of the richest Romans

both in having the spare resources for such purchases, and their use for

them in maintaining the luxurious lifestyle.

A further general consideration keeps Pliny’s figures within the limits
of credibility. It seems likely that a very high percentage of the Roman
empire’s gross national product was materialised in the form of gold and

131

132
133

R. Duncan-Jones, Money and government in the Roman Empire (Cambridge University Press, 1994).
Millar, ‘Looking east’, 531.

R. W. Goldsmith, ‘An estimate of the size and structure of the national product of the early Roman
empire’, Review ofIncome and Wealth 30 (1984), 263-88.

Commodities

187

and was thus in circulation. 134 This feature is of course in
stark contrast to the modern American economy, in which only a very small
fraction of the GNP is in circulation at any one time. As a result, though
this was a huge sum of money, it would not have affected the Roman
economy to the extent Pliny implies. Again this would mean that Pliny’s
statistics for the supposed haemorrhage are not impossible a priori. This
conclusion comes as something of a surprise when there has already been so
silver coinage,

much evidence for Pliny’s ethical concerns. Certainly, the moralistic edge
of Pliny’s comments are no guarantee that they make bad economic sense.

The demand side of the eastern trade is easily established and needs little
The city of Rome was in the late Republic more of a con-

clarification.

sumer city than the Mediterranean world had ever seen before; this meant,
among other things, the ever increasing need for grain to be imported from
far afield to satisfy the needs of its population.

135

Its population

may have

been as high as 500,000 around the turn of the millennium, making it by
far

the Mediterranean’s largest city.

Its

cosmopolitanism is seen in many

sources, not least Juvenal’s Satires and Martial’s Epigrams. Popular enter-

tainments were more important than ever before in securing the goodwill

of the Roman plebs and these alone created a demand for the wild ani,

mals mentioned in section 1 5 above. Whereas they played an important
.

role in the political rivalries that marked the middle decades of the first

centuries bc, under the Principate of Octavian/Augustus they continued
to be a sign of imperial beneficence. The description of the spectacles given

above already made it clear that, at least in contemporary descriptions to
survive, there was a politics of numbers: the greater the number of animals
that were killed, the more impressive,

and hence the more effective, the

spectacle.

But there was, in addition, a private aspect to this. The legendary wealth
of Lucullus and Pompey, both obtained on military campaigns in the eastern
Mediterranean, provided the benchmark for conspicuous consumption.

The area of the Bay of Naples, archaeologically well preserved as a result of
the eruption ofVesuvius in ad 79, contained elite areas with villa complexes.
It is here that the social practices and attitudes of the Roman 6lite have been
well studied, especially through architectural remains.

134

136

Duncan-Jones, Money and government.

135

Purcell, ‘The city of Rome and the plebs urbana\ pp. 644-88.

136

John H. D’Arms, Romans on the Bay ofNaples (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970);
Andrew Wallace-Hadrill, Houses and society in Pompeii and Herculaneum (Princeton University
Press, 1994); Paul Zanker, Pompeii: public and private life (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1998).

Contexts ofa discourse

i88

The younger Seneca takes a grim view of this world of pleasures: in
aphoristic fashion he says that ‘people eat to vomit and vomit to eat. Their

dishes are brought from every corner of the earth, but they do not even

bother to digest them.’ 137 Trimalchio’s dinner-party, with

its

eminently

lavish fare, is exactly the kind of gathering Seneca will have had in mind, all

the more so in light of the host’s upstart social status. And when Pliny tells

of individual fish that cost the price of three cooks (9.67), or Juvenal of a
mullet that cost 6,000 sesterces (Sat. 4), there is moral outrage, but there is
also a note of fascination underlying the account. It is to a later account that

we must turn to see both competitiveness of consumption and its hold over
an author’s imagination. Macrobius, writing around ad 400, tells the story
of rivalry between Mark Antony and Cleopatra in the 30s bc. So greedy had
Antony become for the delights of the east that he had conquered Egypt;
but his wife Cleopatra, ‘since she could not endure being outdone in luxury

by Romans’ (quae uinci a Romanis nee luxuria dignaretur), took a bet with
him that she could consume 10 million sesterces at a single dinner. This she

won by drinking a large pearl that she had dissolved in vinegar. 138 In this
admittedly extreme example, in which the passage of four centuries had

made Antony and Cleopatra into bons vivants of legendary proportions,
the rhetoric of numbers is a means of one-upmanship.

Thus far we have seen large numbers but there are numbers on a smaller
account of eastern spices in book 12 makes consistent

scale too. Pliny’s

reference to the price fetched at Rome in each case. Thus, for example,

long pepper sells at fifteen denarii per pound, white pepper at seven, black
at four.

139

This is in itself a reminder that we cannot expect Pliny’s work to be

in any sense ‘pure’ natural history, a concept against which Foucault argued

with regard to eighteenth-century encyclopaedias. 140 In effect, when Pliny’s
text does reflect the information from contemporary traders (admittedly,
less so than the authority of texts), it is in some ways closer than one might

have expected to the Periplus. Without denying the utilitarian nature of this
text, it is also striking that here too we find information, both historical and
natural historical, which would be of no apparent value to a trader. Nobody
would deny the power of textual authority in Pliny’s Natural history as
has been made evident by contrast with other forms of authority on any
one topic. 141 But a comparison with the Periplus allows us to glimpse an
unexpected facet of the making of this important work.
,

137
138

140

Helv

.

10.3; cf. Ep. 95.42.

Sat. 3. 17.15; cf. Plin.

And see Edwards, Politics of immortality, pp. 186-7.

HN 9. 120-21.

Foucault, Discipline and punish.

139

12.28; cf. Miller, Spice trade pp. 26-8.
,

141

Lloyd, Science folklore pp. 139—45.
,

,

Commodities

189

To conclude this section, we are left with the problem of numbers, both
the large numbers for the trade as a whole, and the smaller ones for individual commodities. Nobody will deny their usefulness for certain kinds of

economic history, yet there are serious difficulties in using them; but they
should not be used uncritically when they appear in historical sources .'

42

Certainly, it is appropriate to say that Pliny’s statistics are suspect: they are

suspiciously rounded, and in any case, it is unclear what source could possi-

bly have given him the information he claims to have. So Pliny himself may

have been lying with statistics, using them to reinforce points motivated by
concerns with morality. But at all events their purely econometric function
is

of limited use to us in the present inquiry. Invaluable statistical analyses

have been done on the Roman economy, and with justification these continue to be used; however, when we are speaking of the wider region of the
eastern trade, the margin for error escalates in undertaking such analyses,

and the available evidence may simply not be adequate. Cultural factors
should be considered relative not only to the Greco-Roman world, but
also the Indian or other areas, including the Arabian peninsula and north
Africa.

It is

much the safest option to make a virtue out of the biases in

sources for the social meaning of Indian goods, since this is what is attested

abundantly.

V.

MAPPING COMMODITIES

‘Brazil, where the nuts come from’

(Brandon Thomas, Charley’s Aunt)

To what extent was Roman geographical knowledge about India generated
by trade activity? (This question is deliberately posed in such a way as to
maintain the view from Rome.) It is worth noting that many of the passages
discussed in section I above are not formally and explicitly geographical but
are drawn from other literary genres. This alone is a reminder that popular
thinking linked commodities and the particular place called India. So when
an Apician recipe specifies that spica Indica should be used, that can be said
to constitute a popular conception of India, whether the specification Indica
in any such case emphasises that the product supposedly comes from India,

or that the Indian variety rather than any other should be used.

We should

try to get beyond this limited though widespread link of product and place.

Scrutiny of geographical treatises, especially those of Strabo and Ptolemy,

add new dimensions to the question, and they make clear that the practice

142

D. Huff, How to lie with statistics, 2nd edn (New York: Norton, 1993).

Contexts ofa discourse

190

of trade did much to make India known, beyond the limited sense mentioned above. Most obviously, Ptolemy in his Geography devotes considerable attention to India’s east coast and to other parts of the Bay of Bengal.

In his seventh book Ptolemy describes the western side of the Ganges, then
the eastern (chapters

1

and 2), before proceeding to describe the island

of Taprobane or Sri Lanka (3) and to delineate the inhabited world more
generally (4). Thus it is the Ganges, at the north of the Bay of Bengal,
that acts as the key divider of India. It should also be noted that these are

the last of the world’s regions given in Ptolemy’s rationalisation of space.

Like Ptolemy’s other ‘descriptions’ this is very statistical: that is, particular
points are plotted with their co-ordinates; in the case of these regions, the
points which Ptolemy maps are settlements, river mouths and mountains.

He provides almost double the amount of information for India on the
near side of the Ganges than beyond, giving the impression of a marked
difference of available geographical knowledge.

Two striking features of

Ptolemy’s South Asia is that India is greatly flattened, in other words it

has nowhere near the character of a subcontinent so familiar from modern

maps; and that the size of Sri Lanka is much exaggerated. Both features are
still

reflected in fifteenth-century maps of the India Ocean. However, the

crucial point here is that it can only have been through merchants, one way

or another, that Ptolemy obtained the information revealed in this part of
his work. 143

In order to gauge the significance of this, we should bear in mind that

the Alexander histories present almost exclusively the Indus Valley; Pliny

and the Periplus focuses on the west coast, though it does briefly mention
the east. The pattern is thus clear: it is the western part of India, and
particularly the Indus Valley, that is best represented in Greek and Roman
literary texts of high prestige; the east coast, on the other hand, receives little
attention at all, and then only in the lower-status texts linked with trade. We
have already seen that long-distance traders were looked down upon. 144 It
appears that this had a direct impact on the social value of the topographical
information associated with them. As regards India, Strabo says as much
in a telling passage for the sociology of geographical knowledge:

As for the merchants who nowadays sail from Egypt via the Nile and Arabian Gulf
as far as India, few have sailed as far as the Ganges, and even these are merely

143

144

For merchants among Ptolemy’s sources see O. A. W. Dilke, ‘The culmination of Greek cartography
in Ptolemy’, in History ofcartography, ed. Harley and Woodward, vol. I, pp. 177-200, at 178.
John H. D’Arms, Commerce and social standing in ancient Rome (Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press, 1981).

Commodities

191

private individuals and are useless with regard to accounts of the places visited.
(15. 1. 4

C686) 145

The context of this remark is the difficulty of obtaining any information
about India, and the importance of Alexander in doing so for certain parts
of it. Strabo strongly implies that the cachet of geographical knowledge
is

in direct proportion to that of the person identified with

it.

It is

also

in this regard that we see the relative prestige value of the various texts

discussed in the view of contemporary Romans: at the high end are the

Alexander historians, with Strabo’s Geography close behind; Pliny’s Natural
history and Ptolemy’s Geography seem to be considerably lower. Certainly,
Pliny’s learned encyclopaedia is based on thousands of earlier works, as he
is

at pains to stress; yet

he admits the presence of more everyday, lower

prestige kinds of information, not least when discussing the geography of
146

South Asia: ‘now that reliable information is available for the first time’.
Ptolemy’s text is in many ways the most scientific geographic text produced
in Greco- Roman antiquity, yet its technical nature associated it more with

merchants than literati in the end it is hard to judge the contemporary
;

status of and responses to this work, however important it was to prove in

the Renaissance.
It

would, however, appear that differences of social status among the

users of spatial information influenced or even created different registers of

geographical thought. In the rest of this section, this thesis will be developed

two directions, namely the issue of experience in the acquisition of
knowledge about India, and the specificity of India relative to a more
in

generalised ‘east’.

V.i.

Experience and mediation

would be possible to hold that supposedly Indian goods were linked
with various kinds of lived experience on the part of ancient Greeks and
Romans: most commonly, direct experience of pepper and other luxuries;
direct experience of a small number of merchantmen; less direct experience
It

is

available to ordinary persons via the accounts of others. The ultimate

authorising experience, on this model, is that of Alexander on his eastern

campaign; the same things that are being tasted and smelled in the Rome

145

Kai oi vOv 5e

Aiyuirrou ttAeovtes EpuopiKoi tu NeiAco Kai tw Apa(3ico koAttco pexP

1

T-ns

’IvSik^s (jtt&vioi pev Kai TTEpiiTETrAEUKaai pexP 1 T °v r ayyou, Kai outoi 6’ iSiarrai Kai ou5ev
Trpos iaTOpiav
146

twv tottcov xpifaipoi.

6.101 nunc primum certa notitia patescente.

Contexts ofa discourse

192

of Pliny’s time receive in the Natural history their foundation myth in the

person of Alexander (e.g., book 12). It is thus typical, for example, that

when his survey of trees reaches India, Alexander is the focaliser:

Now we will present those trees at which Alexander the Great’s conquest marvelled
once that part of the universe was first revealed.' 47
The Pala tree is the marker of the campaign’s farthest point, and another is
remembered for having caused diarrhoea among the troops (12.24). By way
of comparison, even the Periplus, which seems so much like a functional
text without literary embellishment, lives in the memory of Alexander:
Alexander, setting out from these parts, penetrated as far as the Ganges but did not
get to Limyrike and the south of India. For this reason, one can find on the market
in Barygaza even today old

drachmas engraved with the inscriptions, in Greek

letters, of Apollodotus and Menander, rulers

who came after Alexander. (47) 148

The past plays no major role in the work, but it is no coincidence that such
a sense of the past as there is centres on Alexander. Elsewhere the Periplus

author speaks of a place on India’s northwest coast as ‘preserving to this very

day signs of Alexander’s expedition, ancient shrines and the foundations of

encampments and huge wells’ (41). 149
Perfumes were first used by the Persians, according to Pliny: when
Alexander defeated King Darius he captured a chest of them, and this
is

how they came to the Greek world. From there it was a short step to

their use among Romans as part of the elegant life (13.2). Alexander is thus

presented not exactly as the first inventor of the practice, but as the agent

of its transmission from the east to the Mediterranean, a role attributed to

Pompey in other instances (see section II above).
The figure of Alexander is crucial, once again, as a lens by which India
exists in

Roman minds. And, though there is a superficial attractiveness

to using experience as a criterion for assessing his and other responses to

ultimately unsatisfactory. To speak in an unproblematic way
of experience is to imply that there is some authentic, originary quality,
India,

it is

147

nunc eas exponemus quas mirata est ALexandri magni victoria orbe eo patefacto. By something

12.21

of a stretch of syntax, the subject of the first subordinate clause is not Alexander himself but his
conquest, victoria.
148

Kai AAs£av6pos op|jr|0Eis cttto tgov pgpcbv toutcov axpi tou r&yyous SifjAOe, Kon-aAiTTcbv
voTia
’IvSiktis' a<}>’ ou psxpi vOv ev papuya^ois TtaAaiai
TrpoxcopoOai Spaxucri, ypapnaaiv'EAAr|viKoTs EyKExapaypEvai ETriaripa tcov pet’ AAg£av5pov
tt)v te AipupiKTjv Kai tcx

(3e(3cc(7iAeuk6tgov AttoAAoSotou Kai MEvavSpou.
149

Ico^ETai 6e eti Kai vuv Tfjs AAs^avSpou CTTpaTias armsTa TTgpi tous tottous, Upa te apxaTa Kai
QeheAioi TTapE|j(3oAcov Kai <j>pEaTa psyiaTa.

)

Commodities

193

which merely awaits uncovering from under layers of discourse. 150 Given

how unsatisfactory this assumption is, it is better to concentrate on those
layers in their own right, to focus on what we might call different tenors
of mediation. This also allows us to write Roman subjects themselves into
the account. In these terms, Alexander’s expedition is highly mediated for

Roman in the first century ad, by a complex tissue of social memory
and history. There were other journeys too, mediated by different forms of
a

discourse, just as ‘Indian’ objects themselves provided kinds of mediation.

At this point we should consider other journeys to India that provided,
in one way or another, a certain kind of authorising experience in Roman

minds.

An important foundation myth in this story concerns the supposed discovery of the monsoon, and it is worth brief consideration here for the way
in which it writes individual heroes into history. There are four candidates.
First and foremost, there is the figure of shadowy Hippalos: the Periplus
states that the monsoon was thus named after its discoverer (57). It gives no

date, though it has been suggested that he was steersman of Eudoxus.
is

151

It

from Strabo, secondly, that we hear about this Eudoxus of Cyzicus who,

towards the end of the reign of Ptolemy VIII Euergetes II ( c 117 bc), was
.

sent from Alexandria to explore sea-trading routes along the African coast.
As a guide Eudoxus used an Indian sailor who had narrowly survived a shipwreck. Eudoxus was blown off course while sailing down the African coast;
on a subsequent voyage he set out from Alexandria in order to circumnavigate Africa. 152 Thirdly, one Iambulos is mentioned in Theophrastus
Research on plants 9.7.2), Diodorus Siculus (2.55.2; 2.60.1-4) and Pliny
(12.135; 13-18) While engaged in the spice trade off the Somali coast, he was
blown off course to an island, perhaps Sri Lanka. There he spent several
years, before visiting Palibothra and returning overland. 153 Lastly, one story
about the discovery of the monsoon centres on the unnamed freedman of
(.

.

150

For problems with the category of experience as a foundation of historical inquiry, see, e.g., Joan

W. Scott, ‘Experience’, in Feminists theorize the political ed. Judith Butler and Joan W. Scott (New
,

York: Routledge, 1992), pp. 71-96.
151

E.g., Dihle, Antike und Orient, p. 120; Casson, Periplus, p. 224. The suggestion that it represents

some kind of ‘submarine’ wind, i.e. sea-current ( 0 <t>aAos), does not persuade, ingenious though it
may be: Santo Mazzarino, ‘On the name of the Hipalus ( Hippalus wind in Pliny’, in Crossings:
early Mediterranean contact with India, ed. F. de Romanis and A. Tchernia (Delhi: Manohar, 1997),
pp. 72-9.

C98-102, based on Poseidonius (= FGrH 87 F 28); cf. also Pomponius Mela 3.90
and 92, and Pliny 2.169, both of them based on a lost geographical work of Nepos (cf. 6.188).
Among modern scholars see J. H. Thiel, Eudoxus of Cyzicus: a chapter in the history ofthe sea-route to
India and the route around the Cape in ancient times (Groningen: Wolters, 1967), though the extent

152

Strabo

153

Widu-Wolfgang Ehlers, ‘Mit dem Monsunwind nach Indien’, WJA n (1984), 73-84.

of Eudoxus’ travels may be exaggerated.

Contexts ofa discourse

194

Annius Plocamus, and is found also in Pliny (6.84-85 and 12.30 instead).
Carried astray by winds, the unnamed freedman reached the island of Sri

Lanka after a fortnight. (In Pliny’s version ‘Hippuros’ is not a person but a
place in Sri Lanka.) He is entertained by the king, who is so impressed by

the consistent weight of Roman denarii that he sends an embassy back to

Rome. 154 The intriguing possibility is that this is the same person who is
attested in the bilingual inscription mentioned in section III.i above.
Self-evidently, these stories have several features in common: ‘discovery’

by someone engaged in commercial activity; chance arrival on the southern
part of the subcontinent, or alternatively in Taprobane. All of them have,
to some degree, the character of an episode from the Greek novel, and this

alone is grounds for suspicion about their empirical value. What we can
conclude from the evidence discussed is that there was some debate on the

timing involved, as if it required to be discovered more than once. This is
not the place to adjudicate between the different claims: rather, the various
stories are attempts to identify the origins of the Periplus trade, and are thus

foundation myths of a kind. We can see this as part of a subjective history

of Rome, even if the ethnocentric concept of ‘discovery’ is particularly

awkward here. In a sense it is true that ‘there was little to discover, since the
Arabs knew of it earlier’. 155 Yet we must be mindful of the above stories as

ways by which Romans made sense of the monsoon to themselves.

There are many interesting aspects to these stories, not least the fortuitous
accident. In fact, the English word ‘serendipity’

comes from a medieval

Arabic version of such a story of the discovery of Sri Lanka (Serendib in
Arabic). What is more, the Greek novel provides several parallels to several

of the stories recounted above: here again we see the nameless, low-prestige

merchants receiving names for the purposes of fictional narration. 156 It must
be remembered that the novel was itself not a canonical genre in antiquity,

and was thus freer to reflect more of the lower social strata than the ‘higher’
genres such as epic and tragedy.

On the other hand, it is possible to detect instances of direct experience
that have no authorising function in Roman society.

Here we are speak-

ing of people such as the author of the Periplus-. such people are written

out of the literary record, most explicitly by Strabo, even though he and

Ptolemy almost certainly made use of information stemming from their
journeys. The mime (Chapter 2, section I.4) may be considered an oblique
154

Weerakkody, Taprobane p. 45.
Romila Thapar, A history ofIndia, 2nd edn (London: Penguin, 1990), voi. I, p. 107.
,

155

156

Take, for example, the pirates in Xenophon of Ephesus’ Ephesian
Anthia: cf. Chapter 2, section 1 4 above.
.

Tale,

who kidnap the heroine

Commodities

195

pointer to such travel. Furthermore, we know of some people from the

Mediterranean who actually were in India at some time. A census register from Arsinoe in Egypt from ad 72-73 mentions a 32-year-old male

who is absent ‘in India’. 157 Like the author of the Periplus he is nameless
,

today.

There is one other figure of apparently the same social status whose
name has lived on vividly: Thomas the Christian missionary. While this
is

not the place to consider this history of missionary activity in detail,

it is

158

nonetheless striking that this figure, widely remembered as the first

and most important of his kind, travelled to India as an artisan. The main
source on him, the apocryphal Acts ofSaint Thomas, speak of him not as a
merchant, but as a carpenter: it is in this role that he was bought by an agent
of the Indian king Gundaphar. And this is how he is initially occupied once
in India, giving his earnings to the poor. If the source, which on textual
grounds may be dated to the late second or early third century ad, can be
trusted on this point, that would make him effectively one of the Yavanas
referred to in the Tamil poems. According to tradition, this Thomas was

the same person referred to in the Gospels as ‘doubting Thomas’, and so the
story is set around the middle of the first century ad, even though the earliest

remaining evidence for it is more than a century later. By any reckoning

Thomas has special significance when he continues to be commemorated
today as the founding father of Christianity in India. 159 Among the many
aspects of the Thomas story that deserve consideration, it is important to
recognise here that it constitutes independent evidence for the presence of

Yavanas in south India in the first and second centuries ad.
Stories

about both the discovery of the monsoon and Thomas’ mis-

sion may be seen as attempts to add Roman faces to long-term history.

They construct experiences which mediated India for Romans who did
not themselves travel to the subcontinent. They act as a reminder to us to
concentrate on the tenors of mediation themselves rather than the supposed
experiences. This is particularly so when that group which experienced India

most directly, the traders, were regarded with such disdain in the literary
sources.

160

Items of long-distance trade, being geographically encoded, also

offered a kind of experience of distant places.

157
158

159

160

P.

Lond. 2.260 = Stud. Pal. 4.72-79 at p. 74, line 749.

Compare Chapter 6, section V below.
L. W. Brown, The Indian Christians ofSaint Thomas (Cambridge University Press, 1956).
D’Arms, Commerce. For merchants in Christian tradition the Apocalypse is indicative, when it
foretells the destruction of the city of Babylon, ‘the whore’, which may be considered an allegory of
Rome: ‘the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies’ (18:3).

Contexts ofa discourse

196

V.2. Specificity

and identification

A central aspect of Edward Said’s concept of orientalism

is

the tendency

to generalise about ‘the east’. If this chapter has shown that commodities

themselves can construct mental maps, then we may well inquire into the
applicability of the orientalist

model to ancient Greece and Rome. On

the face of it, the fit is snug, in light of what we have already seen. With

regard to the Indian trade discussed above, there are three possible kinds of
generalisation we might hypothetically pursue here, under the sign of orientalism. First, it is possible to construct a generalised ‘East’ beginning in Asia

Minor, the area of Herodotus’ Lydians, through the eastern Mediterranean,
Arabia, Mesopotamia and extending by extrapolation as far as South Asia.

This approach has the advantage of emphasising the fact that, with the
possible exception of Lydia, all the lands mentioned produced goods that

were marked as distinctive. This may be a gross generalisation, but it is
true that all these eastern lands provided the Roman world with high-value

commodities to an extent far exceeding that of, say, northern Europe, and
hence they do share this feature in common. There was a high-value item

from Rome’s far northern frontier, namely amber or pine-resin ( sucina), but
this had nowhere near the same impact in quantity and cachet .'

61

Broadly

speaking, however, topographies of far western and northern lands place

much less emphasis on commodities. The contrast serves to clump together
the eastern lands all the more tightly.

Secondly, a generalised east can act as a reminder to consider the coexistence of land and sea-routes in long-distance trade. As we have seen in

section III above, this is especially important when Greek and Latin sources

tend to emphasise the monsoon route at the expense of the Arabian Gulf
route, which was no less important; and to emphasise direct trade over indirect. Tramp trading via the Gulf was just as

much part of the Asian trade as

the monsoon route, over an even longer span of time. In any evaluation of
these networks it is necessary to take intermediaries into account, not least

the Parthians.
Thirdly, the concept of orientalism can make it easier to see the Indian
Ocean writ large as a unified zone of exchange. The exotic element of the
Indian Ocean expresses the difference between Mediterranean and more
tropical products: spices are an extreme case of distinctiveness, when their
62
Italian equivalents were so different
The effect of the monsoon winds is
.'

161

Barry CunlifFe, The extraordinary voyage ofPytheas the Greek (London: Penguin, 2001), pp. 134—50;
Dalby, Empire ofpleasures, p. 207.

162

On large-scale geophysical differences, see most strikingly Jared M. Diamond, Guns, germs, and
steel:

the fates ofhuman societies (New York: Norton, 1997).

Commodities

197

such that they facilitate travel not only from Arabia to India but in a series
of routes that spanned the entire ocean as far east as Indonesia. It is only
relatively recently that a more holistic approach to the Indian Ocean has

won its supporters; though it does not seem to exhibit the same unitariness
as has recently been shown for the Mediterranean, there is certainly much
to be said for viewing the Indian Ocean as a wider zone of contact.'

63

In

these respects, there can be no doubt that Orientalism offers important
insights to the present study, not least the entanglement of representations

and power relations.
For current purposes, we are still left with difficulties surrounding the
specificity of origins.

Among the many topics broached by Pliny in his

Natural history there is a pervasive concern, or perhaps lip-service, to the
question of origins.

The underlying thought, we might say, is that an

object is known by knowing its origin, whether topographical or personal,
in the case of an inventor (the sense in which the monsoon was ‘invented’

or ‘discovered’). Consequently, it might be said that he offers a series of

geographies of objects: for example, when he discusses trees or marble he
organises his material partly by provenance. Certainly, the attempt to pin

down the provenance of specific long-distance goods has occupied a great
deal of scholarship. However, in its empirical form that is a problem more
for conventional archaeology than for intellectual history, or for cognitive

archaeologies that seek access to the minds of ancient people. As we have
seen, the system quickly breaks down when, for example, the Periplus says

that ‘Indian cinnabar’ can be obtained on the island of Dioscorides (modern

Suqutra, ch. 30). The emphasis here has been on the responses of Romans to

Indian goods, which is a side-stepping of the empirical question of origins.
If this line of analysis is valid, then it is possible to speak of a foreshortened

east seen from the point of view of Roman consumers: it would not have

mattered much whether a luxury item came from the Arabian peninsula or
south Asia or the horn of Africa, for they would have arrived in the same
vessels and caravans. This would be true both

of seaborne and overland

commerce, viewed from the consumption end.
In the discussion of spices above, we have already touched on the prob-

lems in distinguishing origins (botanically determined) from points of distribution. The Periplus, with its practical edge, essentially gives us centres of

distribution rather than production: in the case of the Indian ports, goods
are gathered from the hinterland (e.g., chs. 51, 55). Closer to Italy, there is

an object lesson to be learned from a study of Black Sea fish in classical
165

E.g., Chaudhuri, Trade and civilisation-, Reade, Indian Ocean-, Ray, Archaeology ofseafaring (2003);

and Himanshu P. Ray (ed.), Archaeology ofseafaring: the Indian Ocean in the ancient period (Delhi:
Pragati, 1999).

Contexts ofa discourse

198

sources. It is now clear that several parts of the Black Sea provided these
fish, yet ancient texts consistently give the impression that they came from

Byzantium: this was a Greek-built city, the product of colonisation, amidst

an area that was considered a wilderness. By the necessities of sea-travel,
fish imported from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean would have had to

pass through Byzantium on its way to the Aegean. The obvious conclusion

cloud any notion of the provenance of commodities,
and this is certainly something to bear in mind regarding Indian goods. 164
is that cultural factors

Origins of commodities relate typically to their production, and by extension to their distribution; but consumption plays a major role in this also.

From the earliest reference to eastern people, including the Lydians, we
see them referred to in Greek sources as consumers, almost by stereotype;

the wealth of Croesus is perhaps the most famous example of this. Other

examples too can be found. A telling instance is given by Pliny with regard
to spices,

when he quotes Herodotus to say that the Arabs would pay

an annual tribute of one thousand talents of incense to the king of the
Persians (12.80, referring to Herodotus 3.97). The point here is as much the
practice itself as the fact that Pliny repeats it with a sense of amazement.

What we see here is that eastern peoples are both producers and consumers
of luxury items, in this case incense produced by Arabs and consumed by
the Persian kings. This combined sense of production and consumption

emerges as one explanation for the process of generalising about the east in
antiquity. It was the Persians that invented perfume; this was introduced to

the Greco-Roman world when Alexander found a chest of it among Darius’

goods. 165 To look outside of Persia, Cleopatra’s supposed drinking of the

expensive pearl is an eminent case of conspicuous consumption from Egypt
(see section IV above).

vi.

conclusion: fragments and big men

This has been a story of, among other things, fragments and big men. In
the most obvious sense, archaeologists deal concretely with the fragments

of material remains, which physically or mentally they try to reconstruct
into original wholes, a process that is emblematic of the larger attempts
164

David Braund, ‘Fish from the Black Sea: classical Byzantium and the Greekness of trade’, in Food
in antiquity , ed. John Wilks etal. (University of Exeter Press, 1995), pp. 162-70.
‘preserve of Constantinople’ in the sixteenth century, see Fernand Braudel,
the Mediterranean world in the age of Philip II, tr. Sian Reynolds, 2 vols.

On the Black Sea as

The Mediterranean and

(London: Collins, 1972),

vol. I, pp. 110-13.
165

Plin.

HN

13.3;

and we should remember that, for Pliny, perfume was the ultimate luxury item,

because it could not be reused (13.20).

Commodities

199

to reconstruct past societies from pieces of disparate evidence. Both kinds

of reconstruction are central to the foregoing pages: they make much use
of processes of extrapolation. It might be added that non-archaeological
evidence also falls into the larger sense of reconstruction, especially when
authors such as Pliny and Athenaeus preserve ‘fragments’ of earlier authors
that are today otherwise lost to us. Further, when a comment is extracted

from its original context, for example an Apician recipe is adduced to tell us
about the geography of spices, that too functions as a fragment, even when
there is no talk of a lost author. In short, the entire exercise here involves the

piecing together of (usually small) pieces of data as part of a larger argument
in a new context, one that is focused on Roman society. Perhaps the most

arresting fragment is the ivory statuette from Pompeii: at first blush, that has

a certain integrity to it, and certainly the body is unbroken, yet apparently

the thin piece extending from her head is meaningful only if we understand
it to

have been part of a larger artifact, perhaps a small table. While we can

draw some conclusions from the context of its provenance (not least that
it was buried at the time of the eruption in ad 79), we know precious little
about its social meaning to anyone who might have owned or otherwise
interacted with it. If this object had a social biography, it is one of which
we have only limited knowledge in the light of present evidence. Rather
than deplore the incomplete nature of such understandings, it is useful to
recognise fragments as such, for this better attunes us to the dynamics of
reception and the nuances of social context.

On the other hand, the twin issues of experience and mediation have
also emerged variously and at key points in this chapter. Ancient sources

tend to valorise the experience of heroes in recounting the patterns of trade:
the biggest man of all, Alexander, looms large in Pliny’s account of several

of the commodities recounted.

166

Alexander himself, and sometimes oth-

ers participating in his expedition, are in several instances presented as the
first from

tree,

the Greco-Roman world to experience some particular plant or

and indeed the Indus valley itself. In this way he and his entourage

answer to Greco-Roman needs for the originator of a custom ( ktistes), a need
which we saw in the mutually contradictory stories about the discovery of
the monsoon. Our analysis of the monsoon showed that the entire notion

of discovery needs to be reconsidered, as in fact has been the case with
the discovery of the Americas. It shows a tension in this account between
166

It is

perhaps Braudel and the Annales school that have offered the most compelling critiques and

alternatives to the (more Germanic) history of great men and of events: consider, in classical studies,

Bruce Hitchner, ‘The merits and challenges of an Annaliste approach to archaeology’, JRA 7 (1994),
408-17, with Horden and Purcell, Corrupting sea, pp. 36-9.

200

Contexts ofa discourse

heroes of the literary sources and the ordinary people, especially traders,

about whom we read between the lines: this makes for a kind of tug-of-war

between big men and little men. The gendered term is not inappropriate here, given that the only occasions in which

women have come into

this story has been as metropolitan consumers par excellence (as presented

in Propertius) or as commodities themselves (slaves for the Indian king’s

harem in the Periplus). I have suggested that it is not possible to talk about
experience without considering the processes whereby those experiences are
mediated: by seeing manifestations of the memory of Alexander or of the

monsoon discovery, for example, as kinds of discourse constituting tenors
of mediation. It is important, through the use of this concept, to bear in

mind both that India was, variously, part of the lived experience of ancient

Roman and Greek people, and that it is not possible for us today to do
more than grasp some sense of what those experiences were like.
But material objects too were a kind of mediation between India and
Romans. In so far as, say, pepper was considered an Indian commodity, it

afforded any Roman encountering it in cuisine or elsewhere with a

‘taste of India’.

Such considerations suggest that the tendency to identify

objects with places may be strong, but it is vague, almost by definition.

This may be true in general, and should not be regarded as a surprise in

any sense. It does, however, inject a useful note of caution in considering
scholarship on the spice trade. In the case of India, we must emphasise espe-

network of trade routes within which the monsoon trade took

cially the

place, including its coexistence with land routes. As regards the tendency

to generalise about eastern luxury, it may be important to bear in mind the

near Eastern precedents: Mesopotamian and Iranian courts had themselves

engaged in considerable trade with South Asia, and (at least in the case of
the Achaemenid court) developed their own senses of the Indian exotic, if
the important evidence of Herodotus and Ctesias is to be given full weight.

Rome of the late Republic became heir to that tradition, especially from
the time of Pompey’s victories in the eastern Mediterranean, and especially
in light of Antony’s Egyptian links. The clicked character of this kind of

language by the age of Augustus may be seen in this context.

The best explanation for the Roman tendency to generalise about eastern luxury is provided by the more wide-ranging analyses of Asian trade

networks 167 Whereas Said in Orientalism saw the degree of western gen.

eralisation

167

about ‘the east’ in a negative light, I have tried to show the

E.g., the older classics by Jones, ‘Asian trade’, and Wheeler, Imperialfrontiers, though outdated: see

now esp. Young, Rome's eastern trade, pp. 27-89.

Commodities

201

positive side of this: undoubtedly there was a generalising tendency among

Romans, but it reflects the long-term patterns of trade existing from at
least the third millennium bc; further, it reflects the realities of tramp trad-

ing,

and the fact that no one object could easily be mapped in an exact

manner.

We began with the observation that the Romans showed a strong tendency to identify distinctive goods with distinctive places, and used this
as a

means to think of specifically ‘Indian’ goods in the Roman world.

The subsequent discussion of specificity raises a possibility concerning the
feasibility

of this approach: a modest conclusion then would hold that

the objects discussed can help us only in the most limited sense to identify
the specifically ‘Indian’ aspects of Roman society, whereas what does emerge

strongly is a vivid Roman sense of the exotic based on material objects.

Whatever the difficulties of writing the economic history of ancient
societies, those aspects of ancient lives that are relatively available to modern

study fall under the rubric of consumption. This is where ‘India’ is examined
at a point of reception, and what we have is not a fuller account of Rome’s

trade with South Asia, but a sense of India-in-Rome. That sense is provided

by a variety of objects, most of which carry the cachet of luxury, not least by
persons exchanged as objects: what these shared is the capacity to connote
India in Roman minds.

What has emerged in these pages is the strength of the link made by
many Latin and Greek authors between India and luxury goods, whether
those goods in fact came from the subcontinent or not. In this respect we
may regard India as an imagined place in Roman worldviews. To scrutinise
the connection between goods and place with reference to archaeology and

archaeobotany is to underline the actual existence of that imagined place.

But in a certain sense that is beside the point. To Roman consumers, the
actual existence of so distant a place, directly visited by so few people of
note, was far less important than its impact on the imagination.

At a number of points in this chapter, the conception of spices and
other goods has been referred to as a process of ‘mapping’. This looser
use of the term is in keeping with the comments of Christian Jacob: ‘The

production of a world map always implies a centripetal dynamic, collecting
data from the periphery at a centre, and translating empirical and field data
into a

network of measured distances, defining mathematical positions

easily handled and combined within the geometrical frame of the map .’

168

168

Christian Jacob, ‘Mapping the mind: the earth from ancient Alexandria, in Mappings, ed.

D. Cosgrove (London: Consortium, 1999), pp. 24-49.

202

Contexts ofa discourse

The crucial point here is the centripetal dynamic: it is in this way also that
luxury goods came to Rome from India and elsewhere. To put it differently,

commodities helped map the world at a time when the Roman empire was
at an extent it had never had before, when the city of

Rome was more of a

cosmopolitan city than ever before. The mapping of India that took place

through commodities was thus the mapping of Rome.

CHAPTER 5

Empire

Our own section of the earth, about which I am writing, swims as
it were in the ocean which, as we have said, surrounds it; its greatest
extent is from east to west, namely from India to the Pillars consecrated
to Hercules at Cadiz, a distance of 8568 miles.
(Pliny, Natural history 2.242)

With these words, the elder Pliny introduces the topographical survey that
occupies books 3 to 6 of his Natural history. He proceeds to measure the
distance involved by two routes (2.243-44), beginning in each case with
the Ganges in the east. The significance of this passage lies in the use of
India, in the form of a river situated at its farthest corner, in measuring the
earth. To gain perspective on this, it is necessary to revisit Plato’s supposed

quotation of Socrates:
I

believe,

he said that [the earth]

is

vast in size,

and that we who live between

the Pillars of Hercules and the river Phasis inhabit only a tiny portion of it: we
live around the sea like ants or frogs

around a pond, and there are many others

inhabiting similar regions. ( Phaedo i09bi-5)‘

In this familiar passage, Socrates (or Plato) stresses the size and complexity

of the earth, which is spherical; he raises the possibility that other parts

The key point of contrast here is that, unlike Pliny’s

also are inhabited.

passage above,

it

conveys the sense of an entire social world focused on

the Mediterranean, a kind of epigram contrasting with the epic scale of
Braudel’s or Horden and Purcell’s works.

2

To a certain degree, however, Socrates’ statement makes provision for
Pliny’s, in that Socrates insists on a distinction between the great size of the

1

£T1

TOIVUV,

6<J)T1,

TTOCppEya Tl

eTvOCI

OCUTO, KCXl T)p6(S OlKETv TOUS HEXP 1 'HpCCKAElCOV CTTT|Acbv

duo OaaiSos ev crpiKpcb tivi popico, cocrTTEp TTEpl TEApa puppr)Kas f| paTpayous mpi tt)v
QaAaTTctv oIkoOvtocs, Kai aAAous aAAoOi ttoAAous ev ttoAAoTcti toioutois tottois

o’ikeTv.

On ancient conceptualisations of the Mediterranean, see Horden and Purcell, Corrupting sea,
pp. 10-12 and 530.
2

Braudel, Mediterranean

;

Horden and Purcell, Corrupting sea.

203

204

Contexts ofa discourse

earth as a whole and the small size of the part inhabited. Still, the difference

between the two quotations is indicative of changes in the Mediterranean
world in the space of five centuries. The striking thing about the Platonic
passage is that India, though already discussed by contemporary writers,
is

in a sense ‘off the map’.

By contrast, both Strabo and Isidore, to take

representatives of the start and end of the period under discussion, devote a
certain amount of attention to India in their very different descriptions of

the oikoumene or orbis terrarum. It is in a sense ironic that the Greek world
of Socrates and Plato lies to the east of Italy, thus serving as a reminder of
the geographical expanse of the Roman empire.

The idea that India marked the ends of the world should not cause
any alarm, as the nearly cliched quality of the epigraph suggests. As we
shall see in the pages that follow, this

sentiment abounds in texts from

the Augustan age, as well as those from the later empire. Indeed, it is in

the age of Augustus that we shall seek the creation of the cliche. But the

deceptive ease of the proposition masks an intricate set of questions focused

on just what that world was: the inhabited world or the Roman Empire
specifically?

What is more, we can expect this question to be answered dif-

ferently for different periods of Roman history, if we were to take Augustus

and Isidore as book-ends: the first because his reign marked a high point
of imperial unity following the Battle of Actium, the second because his
writings codify so much of ancient paideia
life

in the medieval west.

,

and defined much of its after-

This is a period of monarchy, and one theme

of this chapter will be the relationship between conceptions of space and
the (often symbolic) self-presentation of emperors who claim to rule that

space 3
.

The borders of empire are, in the period discussed, not easily distinguished from the ends of the earth, and this is a problem which must

engage us centrally if we are to consider what India meant as a marker of
the distant periphery. What is the nature and degree of the overlap between
the two? To borrow the titles of two recent studies, we are inquiring here
into the degree to which the limits of empire coincide with the edges of

the earth 4 As we shall see at various points in this chapter, this question
.

of coincidence can be traced back to the details of Alexander’s expedition:

on the one hand, the Indus valley was conquered by Alexander when he
defeated King Porus at the river Hydaspes (Jhelam). In this sense ‘India’
3

Carsten Colpe, ‘Von Alexander dem Grossen zum Grossmongul Gehangir. Die Frage nach einer
indischen Enthellenisierung des Weltherrschaftsgedankens’, in Philanthropic! kai Eusebeia ed. Glenn
,

W. Most etal. (Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1993), pp. 46-73, and esp. 47-62.
4

Ben Isaac, The limits ofempire (Oxford: Clarendon, 1992) and Romm, Edges.

,

,

Empire

205

came to be linked with Alexander, as a marker of the ultimate military
conquest. On the other hand, India was never added to Alexander’s empire
in the sense of governance. We must remember here that military conquest
was only one limited part of a Roman sense of empire: administration was
another, in fact something much more important in the practical workings

of hegemony 5
.

If the definition of empire were not difficult enough, there is the partic-

ular problem raised by the notion of imperialism 6 As an explicit concept
.

and term, it goes back no further than the late nineteenth century 7 its
:

applicability to the Rome of the first centuries raises questions of its own 8
.

There is an irony here, given the explicit and implicit comparisons that
have been made between the Roman empire of Augustus and the British

empire of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 9 whereas the concept of
:

imperialism has often centred on the British presence in South Asia, India
never was part of the Roman empire in the most obvious sense, nor perhaps
in any sense at all.

There are important ways, then, in which we can use India to tease out
the question of what ‘empire’ meant over a certain period of Roman history. Empire is effectively defined by ‘governmental superstructure’ accord-

ing to one account

10
.

The ‘mental maps’ emphasised in other accounts

should in no way be thought to compete with this administrative sense
5

Mommsen’s landmark work, Das romische Staatsrecht 3rd edn (Leipzig: Hirzel, 1877), emphasised a
legalistic definition of empire, in terms of imperium

more recently surveyed by Georg Klingenberg,
‘Imperium’, RAC XVII (1996), cols. 1121— 42. By contrast, a recent study pointedly emphasises
economic over political senses of empire, with particular reference to the contemporary world (and
:

the spatial practices that distinguish it from ancient societies): Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri,

Empire (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000).
6

On the difficulties of defining empire, see e.g. Kathleen D. Morrison, ‘Sources, approaches, definitions’, in Empires: perspectives from archaeology and history, ed. Susan E. Alcock et al.

(Cambridge

University Press, 2001), pp. 1-9; Anthony Pagden, Empires and peoples: Europeans and the rest of the
world, from antiquity to the present (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2001), pp. 7—12.
7

For a restatement of Marx’s definition of imperialism - as opposed to empire - as a modern

phenomenon, tied to capitalism, see E. J. Hobsbawm, The age of empire, 187$—1914 (New York:
Pantheon, 1987), p. 60.
8

9

New approaches to the issue of Roman imperialism are to be found in Dialogues, ed. Mattingly (1997),
and Roman imperialism: readings and sources ed. Craige B. Champion (Oxford: Blackwell, 2004).
Susan E. Alcock fruitfully considers empire in terms of collective memory: The reconfiguration of
memory in the eastern Roman empire’, in Empires, ed. Alcock et al., pp. 323-50.
Peter Brunt, ‘British and Roman imperialism’, CSSHj (1965), 267-88, repr. in his Roman imperial
themes (Oxford: Clarendon, 1990), is one notable example among many. The same topic has been
taken up, more recently, by Javed Majeed, ‘Comparativism and references to Rome in British
imperial attitudes to India’, in Roman presences: receptions of Rome in European culture, 1798—194 5,
ed. Catharine Edwards (Cambridge University Press, 1999), pp. 88-109, and Vasunia, ‘Hellenism

and empire’.
10

Fergus Millar et al., The Roman empire and its neighbours (New York: Homes and Meier, et al. 1981),
p. 10.

206

Contexts ofa discourse

of empire, but rather be viewed as complementing and modifying it 11
.

It is important to consider technical and ideological aspects in tandem,
and in this respect a recent work by Claude Nicolet is exemplary; India

remains, however, largely outside of his purview 12 In this chapter, I share
.

Nicolet’s view that the Augustan period was crucial to the formation of

a discourse about empire ; 13 but

I

go well beyond that period to trace

changes and continuities of that discourse in late antiquity and early Middle
Ages.

The name ‘Rome’ initially denoted an agricultural village settlement
from the end of the Bronze Age, around 1000 bc. 14 To recall this is to
recognize the magnitude of the process that had brought it control first

of Italy and then, by the mid-second century bc, of the entire Mediterranean.

We detect some sense of the weight of the Roman past, grandly

conceived, in Livy’s History. For Diodorus, Rome provided both the physical circumstances to write and also, by virtue of its expansion (he implies),

the occasion for writing 15
:

For this city’s pre-eminence, which stretches in its power to the edges of the
inhabited world, has provided us during our lengthy sojourn there with the most
readily available and plentiful resources. (1.4.3)

16

There was a high premium on expressions of universal power: such was
the nature of the political revolution that saw Octavian end the protracted
civil conflict by wresting sole power, and then present his rule in the frame

of republican democracy. In the late Republic, such assertions of power,
usually with reference to Alexander, involved claims to political sovereignty,

and so were part of the clashes between ‘strong men’. But if it was a
11

An influential work is that by Peter Gould and Rodney White, Mental maps 2nd edn (Boston:
,

Houghton Mifflin, 1986); see also Mark Monmonier, How to lie with maps 2nd edn (Chicago:
,

University of Chicago Press, 1996). Ideological aspects of constructing spatial distance are well

explored by Martin W. Lewis and Karen E. Wigen, The myth ofcontinents: a critique ofmetageography
12

(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997).
Thus, most significantly, Nicolet, Space geography, its only reference to India is on p. 21, in pass,

ing.

More recently, Ando, Imperial ideology emphasises the role of consensus in the creation and
,

maintenance of political unity within the empire.
13

Cf., for example, Roger Dion, Aspects politiques de la geographic antique (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1977),

pp. 175-222; but note the scepticism of Nicholas Purcell, ‘Maps, lists, money, order and power \JRS

80 (1990), 178-82.
14

T.

J.

Cornell, The beginnings of Rome: Italy and Rome from the Bronze Age to the Punic Wars,

BC (London: Routledge, 1995), pp. 48-80.
In both counts, we must remember the Diodorus as a Sicilian was himself not a natural member of

c. 1000—264
15

Rome s ruling 6lite; like other writers of universal history, or in fact large-scale geography, he came
from the peripheries: Alonso-Nunez, ‘Augustan world history’.
16

yap TauTTis tt)S ttoAegos UTTEpoxf), SiaTEivoucra tt) SuvapEi Ttpos Ta TtEpaTa t^S oIkoupevtis,
EToipoTcrras xai irAEiaTas fmiv a<f>oppas TTapEaxeTO irapE7Ti8r)|jf)aaaiv ev autr) ttAeico xpovov.
f)

Empire

20 7

feature of Augustus’ rule to maintain the trappings of republicanism, the

pretence was to wear thin and in many respects disappear in the decades
after his death in ad 14.

His rule had seen the Roman state reach military

ascendancy on a scale it had not known before. This was to provide the
basis for an

empire that lasted till the late fifth century in the west and

mid-fifteenth in the east. Self-evidently, Rome’s imperial identity evolved
slowly. The more wide-ranging analyses of this process stress the role of

the army, and the dual processes of political unification and decentralisation of power. 17 Imperial authority and war are both part of the equation.

The birth of the name Romania in the fourth century testifies to the need
to distinguish between the City and what had by now become a world
18

empire.
It is no coincidence that this came into use only once the city
of Rome ceased to hold the monopoly of power it did at the time of

Augustus.
In the current framework we have to restrict ourselves to selected but
representative points, to what has in the context of a different ethnography

been described as ‘sightings’. 19 These are chosen for a number of reasons:
merely that they are accessible to us; that they are in some manner indicative

of an evolving history; and that they shed light on the perceptions of India
over an extended period.

I.

PAX ROMANA AND PEOPLE OF THE DAWN

The ekphrasis of Roman history on Aeneas’ Shield begins with Romulus
and Remus and culminates, after various episodes, with the ‘fanfare’ representing Augustus’ victory at Actium. The following extracts together offer
us a key passage for grasping Augustus’ discourse about empire, and for the

place of India in that discourse:

Next came Antonius with outlandish wealth and multifarious arms, victorious
from people of the Dawn and the Red Sea, leading the power of the East, of Egypt,
even of remote Bactra

.

.

.

Actian Apollo, looking on from above, began to pull

17

Millar et al

lS

Johannes Irmscher, ‘Sulle origine del concetto Romania’, in Populi e Spazio Romano tra Diritto e

.

,

Roman empire I—12; Garth Fowden, Empire to commonwealth (Princeton University
,

Press, 1993), pp. 57-8.

Profezia (Naples: Edizione Scientifiche, 1986), pp. 421—9, on Romania as a designation of imperium

Romanum as opposed to Rome the city. This is first attested in Athanasius, Historia Arianorum 35
,

(ad 358).
19

Jonathan D. Spence, The Chan’s great continent: China in western minds (New York: Norton,
1998).

Contexts ofa discourse

208

his bow. All the Egyptians, Indians, Arabians and Sabaeans, terrified at this sight,
2°
turned in flight. (Virgil, Aeneid 8.685-88 and 704— 6)
It is difficult to overlook in this extract a totalising sense of ‘the east’. This
is

conveyed by a number of means: among them one might mention the

building up within the passage as a whole the drama of a warlike lining-up

of opposing deities, Roman and eastern; the use of the generalising term
oriens (literally ‘of the dawn’, i.e. eastern );

21

and the joined naming of various

peoples from the east, Egyptians, Indians and Arabians (‘Sabaeans ’).

22

It is

in this limited sense that we can talk about one aspect of Said’s Orientalism:

the tendency to conceive of the east as a totality. To a certain degree this
fits the circumstances of the Battle of

Actium; more compellingly, perhaps,

was played up in the subsequent propaganda of Octavian/ Augustus. 15
Here is triumphalist rhetoric, in which India played a part, if a limited
and predictable one. But it is another matter entirely to consider what this
it

hinc ope barbarica uariisque Antonius armis

20

,

victor ab Aurorae populis et litore rubro
Aegyptum uirisque Orientis et ultima secum
,

Bactra uenit

.

.

.

Actius haec cemens arcum intendebat Apollo
desuper: omtiis eo terrore Aegyptus et Indi

,

omnis Arabs, omnes uertebant terga Sabaei.
Philip R. Hardie has analysed the shield of Aeneas as a ‘cosmic icon’, and indeed the centrepiece of

the Aeneid. Virgil's Aeneid: cosmos and imperium (Oxford: Clarendon, 1986), pp. 336-76; cf. Ando,
Imperial ideology pp. 278-92.
,

21

TLL IX.2.1003.24, s.v. oriens

,

for this passage; but note also Hor.

Carm. 1.12.55-56, with TLL

IX.2.1002.76-79. In light of the ostensibly generalised use of this word, it is unclear why Whittaker,

Rome and its frontiers, pp. 144, should take this to indicate India in a restrictive sense. Alexander is a
figure around

whom the idea of the east crystalised, especially its farthermost points: he set out to con-

quer Asia and the outermost parts of the east: ad subigendam Asiam atque ultima orientis (Curt. 3.10.4;
cf. 5.5.14).

These parts are contrasted with ‘Europa’. Curtius speaks of India’s inhabitants as ultimi

orientis (6.2.18; cf. 9. 10.12 also on Indians). Apart from Alexander, two others to be linked with ‘the
east’ in a comparably generalised sense are

Pompey (Solin. 1.121) and Antony (Serv. auct. ad Verg. Aen.

8.686). In his world history, Pompeius Trogus speaks of Rome and Parthia as being the two rival world

empires, Parthia ruling the east: Parthi, penes quos uelut diuisione orbis cum Romanisfacta nunc Orientis

imperium est, Scytharum exulesfuere (41.1.1). For discussion of this passage, see Alonso-Nunez, ‘Augustan world history’, at 64. In other instances the term oriens is used of Syria ( Schol Juv. 3.64; 4.108).
The senior military office of comes orientis introduced by Constantine, came, by the middle of
’

,

the fourth century, to have special significance in light of conflict on the Iranian frontier. Given
the expanding field of this officer’s power, the title proved to be suitably vague. See RE IV. 1 (1900)

659— 62 (Seeck); A. H. M. Jones, Later Roman empire pp. 104—6.
With regard to this list and esp. lines 705—6, Katharine Toll, ‘Making Roman-ness and the Aeneid
CL Ant. 1 6 (1997), 34-56, at 46, exaggerates somewhat when she claims that ‘half of the peoples
,

22

,

mentioned simply were not there’. I do agree with the observation that the foreign peoples on the
shield of Aeneas are ‘misrepresented’ so as to appear more foreign; but I offer a different explanation
in this chapter.
23

On the contrast between Octavian/Augustus’ initially exuberant self-presentation with his later
restraint, and the role of Actium in that process, Paul Zanker, Power of images in the age ofAugustus

(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1988); and Robert Alan Gurval, Actium and Augustus
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995).

Empire

209

meant in the Realpolitik of Roman political-military strategy. To create a
provisional distinction, then, for analytical purposes: we must be alert both
to the rhetoric of empire and to the political and military realities linked

with it, in other words both to the propaganda and the lived experience of

Rome’s empire. The complexities of the situation begin to emerge when
we avoid a narrowly representational approach: India in Pliny or Strabo
not only mirrors political reality, but it also creates or at least reinforces it
in Roman minds. The issue of the social reality of literary texts has been

most often considered with regard to Augustan poetry, but should not be
limited to it. 24 There is a self-reproducing quality to this kind of rhetoric;
to adapt Clifford Geertz’s famous phrase, we are dealing with models of

and for thinking about empire. 25 Certainly the tralatician element is clearly
seen in the late Roman period, when there was less actual contact, and India

was presented with basically literary images. The question that is harder
to ask is whether the same processes are true for earlier periods too, such
as the Augustan age. There can be no doubt that the authority of written

texts prevailed in significant ways well before the late-antique periods also:

Pliny’s Natural history is an

eminent case in point. 26 We are justified in

speaking of this phenomenon as a discourse, where that term is used to

emphasise the complexity and self-fulfilling quality of representations.

Li. Orbis terrarum imperio populi Romani subiecta 27
If statements about the grandeur of empire proliferated in the Augustan

age, they were in essence no novelty.

28

The second century bc was a key

period in the evolution of the discourse of empire, especially the successful

conclusion of hostilities with Carthage in 146 bc. 29 Polybius is a key witness

24

In the light of recent work on Roman poetry, it cannot now be maintained that the political
element of Augustan poetry was one-way traffic from the state to writers, on the lines outlined

by Ronald Syme, Roman revolution (Oxford: Clarendon, 1939), esp. pp. 459-75: more recently e.g.
Karl Galinsky, Augustan culture: an interpretative introduction (Princeton University Press, 199 6);

Matthew S. Santirocco, ‘Horace and Augustan ideology’, Arethusa 28 (1995), 225-43, esp. 22 7;

Thomas Habinek, The politics ofRoman poetry (Princeton University Press, 1998), present literature
as an ‘intervention’ in social practice.
25

26
28

Geertz, Interpretation of cultures, pp. 93-4, on models of and for society.
Lloyd, Science, folkbre.

27

This is a slight adaptation of the title of the Res gestae.

The significant Republican background to Augustan imperialism is one absence with which Edward
N. Luttwak’s provocative The grand strategy of the Roman empire from the first century ad to the
third (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974) has been charged, with justification. For a
more nuanced treatment, Susan P. Mattern, Rome and the enemy: imperial strategy in the Principate

(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999), esp. pp. 81-122.
29

Peter White, Promised verse (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993), p. 61; more generally,

Erich S. Gruen, The Hellenistic world and the coming of Rome (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1984).

Contexts ofa discourse

210

on this topic: if his work as a whole documents Rome’s rise to the power
of world empire, then his sixth book in particular offers an explanation of
the socio-political background 30 He stands out for the clarity with which
he was able to see Roman history as process as opposed to a mere sequence
.

of events 31
.

Cicero’s speeches are another rich source for thinking about the edges

of the earth 32 Such passages testify to the importance of this theme during
.

the mid-first century bc, at a time when conflicts between rival leaders

were determined as much on the fringes of the Mediterranean world as in
the city of Rome 33 As a rhetorical technique, they illustrate how an orator
.

could appeal to (and manipulate) commonly held views, such as those of
the ‘perfidy of the Gauls’, in communicating with his audience.
In identifying the roots of Augustus’ sense of empire, we should be especially alert to Crassus’ and Pompey’s activities in the eastern Mediterranean.
That may have been a different ‘east’, but it was a politically significant east
nonetheless, and one that contributed to the conceptual frame for subsequent thinking. And the paradigm of Alexander, so important to Pompey,

always contained the potential for the ‘east’ to stretch yet farther in that
direction, even if this was never to be realised in practice.

In analysing Augustan discourse, it is as well to start with a text that can

be linked most directly to Augustus himself, the Res gestae

:

Embassies were often sent to me from kings in India; never before had they been
seen in the presence of any Roman commander. The Bastarnae, Scythians and the
kings of the Sarmatians on either side of the river Don, as well as the kings of
the Albanians, Iberians and Medes sought our friendship by means of embassies.
(31.1-2) 34

In particular, what we must notice in the passage quoted is the pointed use of
‘friendship’ ( amicitia)-. the wide range of its connotations is exploited so that

Augustus can convey both his military supremacy and his clemency at the

Frank Walbank, A Greek looks at Rome: Polybius VI revisited’, Scripta Classica Israelica 17 (1998),
45—59; Clarke, Between geography and history pp. 77—128.
Indeed, if we define imperialism as a process, we are left with Polybius, a Greek writer not a Roman,
as the only one to take a general view of Roman imperialism: Gruen, Hellenistic world p. 278.
32
Ann Vasaly, Representations: images of the earth in Ciceronian oratory (Berkeley: University of

30

,

31

,

California Press, 1993), shows how Cicero in his speeches relies on stereotypes linked to particular places. The implications of this for the current study are considerable, as will be made clear in

the conclusion.
33

34

This is certainly true at least from the time of the First Triumvirate of 60 bc, with Crassus, Caesar

and Pompey all campaigning extensively in far-flung parts of the Mediterranean.
ad me ex India regum legationes saepe missae sunt non uisae ante id tempus apud quemquam Romanorum
ducem. nostram amicitiam appetiuerunt per legatos Bastarnae Scythaeque et Sarmatarum qui sunt citra

flumen Tanaim et ultra reges, Albanorumque rex et Hiberorum et Medorum. (31. 1-2)

1

,

Empire

21

same time. 35 The unequal power relations between Rome and its ‘friends’
are understood, to the degree that they can be casually glossed over in
this manner. In understanding the exercise of power that lies behind these

assertions it is again important to remember their Iranian background. 36 In

the choice of terminology, Augustus carefully presents himself as a states-

man in the Republican tradition, rather than a despot; 37 nonetheless, both
precedents of Darius’ and Xerxes’ inscriptions are hard to overlook, when

they too emphasise foreigners paying tribute. 38 In general, the passage is
typical of the chapters (26-33) * n which the spatial expanse of the empire is

indicated: by its cool, self-assured tone it describes the borders of Roman

governance in such a way as to stipulate its extent for future time. In Nicolet’s words, it ‘is not a text with symbolic or astrological inclinations; rather,
it is a factual

expose of great sobriety’ (17). And if the Res gestae substantiates

Augustus’ claim to have extended the empire’s influence to the limits of the

known world, we shall have to consider to what extent the texts of Strabo,
Mela and Pliny come in the wake of Roman imperial expansion; to what
extent they too may be regarded as texts of the pax Romana.
By the time of Propertius’ second book of Elegies (28-25 BC ) we find
variations on the theme of the grandeur of Rome’s conquests:

No longer does the Euphrates allow Parthian cavalry to glance behind their backs,
and regrets retaining possession of Crassus’ men: even India presents its neck to
your triumph, Augustus, and the house of virgin Arabia trembles before you; and
hereafter if any land retreats to the world’s end, let it be captured and feel your

wrath! (2.10.13-18) 39

35

On the pointed variation implicit in the term amicitia see Ulrike Asche, Roms Weltherrschaftsidee und
Aussenpolitik in der Spdtantike im Spiegel der Panegyrici Latini (Bonn: Habelt, 1983), esp. pp. 48-65

and 130—8, well illustrates the careful balance between triumphalism and clementia in late Latin panegyric. On the balancing of elements in imperial self-presentation, see esp. Sabine G. MacCormack,
Art and ceremony in late antiquity (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981).
36

The use of Aramaic in Asoka’s inscriptions shows the influence of Achaemenid monumental writing:
Millar, ‘Looking east’, 518; cf. Thapar, Early India, p. 182.

37

Zvi Yavetz, ‘The Res Gestae and Augustus’ public image’, in Caesar Augustus: seven aspects (Oxford:

38

See Chapter 1, section I above. The provenance of the surviving copy and fragments of this inscription
- Ancyra, Apollonia and Antioch - further suggests continuity between the Achaemenid epigraphic

Clarendon, 1984), pp. 1-36; with different emphasis, Brian Bosworth, ‘Augustus, the Res Gestae and
hellenistic theories of kingship’, /ftS 89 (1999), 1-18.

habit and Augustus’ self-presentation in this case.
39

iam negat Euphrates equitem post terga tueri
Parthorum et Crassos se tenuisse do Let.
India quin, Auguste, tuo dat colla triumpho,
et domus intactae te tremit Arabiae-,
et si qua extremis tellus se subtrahit oris

,

sentiat ilia tuas postmodo capta manusi

Contexts ofa discourse

212

It will be noticed that the passage quoted promotes the illusion that India
is

already conquered by Augustus. Still with Propertius we find:

Divine Caesar is contemplating war on the Indians, planning to cleave the waters of
the gem-laden ocean with his fleet. The pickings are [will be?] handsome, citizens:
the ends of the earth prepare triumphs for you; the Tigris and Euphrates will flow

under your jurisdiction. (3.4.1 — 4) 40

The poet goes on to recall Crassus’ loss of the standards, and the need for
this blot on Roman history to be expiated. The pointed use of the future
tense occurs also at Elegies 3.1.

Here Propertius foretells conquest up to

Bactria, which will from that point be the edge of empire:

Many, Rome, will add your praises to their annals, singing one day of Bactra as
the boundary of your rule. (3.1.15— 16) 41

By focusing on the future aspect of (yet more) military victories to come,
Propertius is in effect offering an additional reason for his refusal to bow
to supposed pressure to write grand epic in praise of the emperor. The idea
is

this:

others will sing of you in the future, just as you will make further

conquests in the future. While there are several levels of complexity in the
recusatio,

and indeed in the poetry of public praise generally, it is as well

to note one particular aspect here: the use of the future tense as a means

of deflecting expectations, its compatibility with the recusatio. This literary
consideration is something to keep in mind in assessing the Augustan poets
as possible sources for supposed expansionism.

There is no missing the poem’s matter-of-fact tone, as if leaving no

room for doubt that Augustus will in fact set out to conquer India. It is this
casual tone of assertions about the inevitability of Roman conquest that
calls for explanation. In translating the passage above, it is debatable how
we should translate the ostensibly simple present-tense verbs meditatur (line
1, ‘is planning’) and parat (3, ‘prepare’): how strong a sense of future time
do they convey? 41 The military-strategic side of this leads the discussion in

arma deus Caesar ditis meditatur ad Indos

40

et freta gemmiferi findere classe maris.

magna, Quiris, merces: parat ultima terra triumph os\
Tigris et Euphrates sub tua iura fluent.

multi Roma, tuas laudes annalibus addent

41

,

,

qui finem imperii Bactra futura canent.
Bactria is, strictly, to the northwest oflndia; but in context it clearly has the same function.
42

On the Latin present tense used with forward-looking force, see Raphael Kiihner and Carl Stegmann,
Ausfuhrliche

Grammatik der lateinischen Sprache

,

5th

edn (Hannover: Hahn, 1976),

vol.

II. 1,

pp. 120-1. For the counter-intuitive but powerful point that the present tense in Indo-European

languages bears little relation to the ‘time that now is’, see Andrew L. Sihler, New comparative

grammar of Greek and Latin (Oxford: Clarendon, 1995), pp. 442-3.

Empire

213

a different direction, to be considered later in this chapter. For the present,
as we consider the discourse about empire, let us limit ourselves to noting

that in this passage, and in fact in the poem as a whole, the combination

of the military and the economic elements: the first couplet moves directly

from the arma to the economic implications of conquest, as if these were
readily concomitant. Later on, he expresses the wish that Mars grant him,
in his lifetime, the chance to see the day ‘when

I’ll

see Caesar’s chariots

weighed down with plunder’ (3. 5. 13). 43
Elsewhere Propertius poses Cynthia a rhetorical question, ‘What would
you do if I were to be kept by military service in faraway India, or if my ship

were to stand still in Ocean?’ 44 When so much in love elegy hinges on the
physical proximity of lovers, India stands for an extreme case of distance;
military service underlines that physical absence, and plays on the common
elegiac trope of militia amoris ‘love’s warfare’. 45
,

Horace, in at least two passages, shows the same principles at work. First:

May [Augustus] defeat the Parthians who threaten Latium, or else the Chinese
and Indians situated alongside the eastern border, subduing them in a deserving
triumph. (Horace, Odes 1.12.53-57) 46

And, second, this is how Horace ends a poem commemorating fifteen
years 47 of Augustus’ sovereignty:

At you the previously invincible Cantabrian marvels, the Mede marvels, and so do
the Indian and the fleeing Scythian, O propitious keeper of Italy and of mistress
Rome. You the Nile, which conceals the sources of its streams, heeds, and so
does the Hister, and the speedy Tigris, and monster-bearing Ocean that bellows
at the distant Britons; You the land of Gaul, fearless before death, and of hardy
Hiberia; you the Sygambri, who rejoice in slaughter, worship, having put aside
their weapons. (Horace, Odes 4.14.41-52) 48

43

44

qua uideam spoliis oneratos Caesaris axes.
quid si longinquos retinerer miles ad Indos, / out mea si staret nauis in Oceano? (2.9A.29-30). Goolds
transposition is plausible, on the grounds that the couplet makes better sense following lines 19—20

(on Cynthia’s unwillingness to be alone, sola) than 27-28.
45

On the complexity of this elegiac trope, Kennedy, Arts of love, pp. 46-63. It may be considered
characteristic of the paradoxical nature of love:

cf.

Anne Carson, Eros the bittersweet (Princeton

University Press, 1986).
ille seu Parthos Latio imminentis

46

egerit iusto domitos triumpho

siue subiectos Orientis orae

Seras et Indos.
47 tertio
48

.

.

.

lustro (37).
te Cantaber non ante domabilis

Medusque et Indus, te profugus Scythes
miratur, 0 tutela praesens
Italiae dominaeque Romae

,

.

214

.

Contexts ofa discourse

Implicit in this is a degree of wishful thinking: if an Indian ruler did send

ambassadors to Rome this need not have implied any political subordination. In any case, it is not impossible that these ‘ambassadors’ were traders.
Yet, as a marker of the ends of the earth, it was essential for a poet to imply
its participation

in the empire, for the purposes of glorifying that empire.

By the same token, Augustus’ ‘victory’ over the Parthians was not a full-scale
military conquest, but a diplomatic deal 49 In Horace’s references to India
.

and Indians, the subcontinent is more often than not linked with another
eastern region, be that Arabia, China or Media 50
.

1 2 City and empire
.

.

Other peoples have been restricted in the territory given them, but the extent of
the city of Rome matches that of the universe. (Ovid, Fasti 2.683-84) 51

In this most quotable of quotes,

Ovid points to a recurrent feature of

the Augustan discourse we have been considering: to the expansion of the

Roman polity well beyond the limits of a town settlement urbs) to embrace
(

the entire universe ( orbis terrarum) 52 But the pun is not unique to Ovid,
,

and did not even begin with him: it had been used earlier by Cicero and

te fontium qui celat origines

Nilusque et Hister, te rapidus Tigris

,

te beluosus qui remotis

obstrepit Oceanus Britannis,
te non pauentis funera Galliae

duraeque tellus audit Hiberiae

,

te caede gaudentes Sygambri

conpositis uenerantur armis.
49

On the deal whereby the legionary standards lost by Crassus at Carrhae in 53 bc, together with
the hostages captured during Antony’s campaign, were regained by Augustus, see Erich S. Gruen,

‘The expansion of the empire under Augustus’, CAH IX (1996, 2nd edn), pp. 148-96, at 158-9; and
J. A. Crook, ‘Political history, 30 bc to

50

With China: Seras et Indos ( Carm
Indiae (3.24.1-2), extremos Arabas

51

ad 14’, in G4 //X, pp. 70-112, at 90.

1.12.56); Arabia: intactis opulentior / thesauris Arabum et diuitis

.

.

.

et Indos ( Epist. 1.6.6); Media: Medus

gentibus est aliis tellus data limite certo

.

.

et Indus (4.14.42).

:

Romanae spatium est urbis et orbis idem.
52

Later in the same work, Ovid pointedly expresses the contrast between the humble rural settlement

with the subsequent world empire, by focusing on the identity of place over a gap in time: hie, ubi

nunc Roma est, orbis caput, arbor et herbae / et paucae pecudes et casa rara fuit (5.93-94). The habit of
pointing to changes over time by focusing on the same locality recurs in the considerable body of
later writings about Rome; here, by contrast, destruction is stressed. See, e.g., Hildebert of Lavardin

in the twelfth century, and other texts collected by Bernhard Kytzler (ed.), Roma Aeterna (Zurich:

Artemis, 1972). Cf. Nicholas Purcell, ‘The city of Rome’, in The legacy ofRome: a new appraisal ed.
,

Richard Jenkyns (Oxford: Clarendon, 1992), pp. 421-53; Catharine Edwards, Writing Rome: textual
approaches to the city (Cambridge University Press, 1996), esp. pp. 69—95.

5

Empire

215

Varro 53 It was to have a long afterlife, due at least in part to the instability
.

of Ovid’s poetic

language 54

relevant here:

proverbial nature merely illustrates how familiar it was

its

.

Be that as it may, it is the thought that is

over a long period. To focus on the Augustan period, the sentiment itself

comes as no great surprise when one considers the centrality of the city of
Rome, and particularly its monuments, to Augustus’ reign 55 Historically
.

speaking, this was more than wordplay: indeed, Augustus’ success can be

explained by a careful balancing of the interests of orbis and urbs. But what,
if anything, does it imply for India, a part of the universe that was never
subsumed into the Roman sphere of governance?
If any general conclusion is to be drawn from the sources discussed in

this chapter, it might be said that India became more of an issue for

Rome at

this high point in its status world empire. In the Res gestae, in Virgil and in

Horace we have seen a tendency to conflate empire and universe, what we
might call false consciousness. We see here both a backward- and a forwardlooking sense of empire: both the idea that the Roman state had already
reached its grandiose limits, as Augustus would imply in his Res gestae, and
the forward-looking aspect of outward expansion, most clearly seen later
in Cassius Dio’s account of Trajan (subsection 1

.

below). In general, we

might say that imperial expansion is best understood in a purely notional
way, rather than being in any sense a literal plan to conquer. In other words,
India is an issue in so far as the edges of empire were thought and spoken

about at its centre(s) of empire. One might say, following Ovid, that Rome
was part of the orbis in so far as it could be seen in the urbs.
In the political register at least, Augustan poetry produces an enormous

range of interpretive problems, more than bear discussion here. In particular, scholars

have debated how seriously to take the adulatory aspect,

especially given that some passages within the same authors sound a more

subversive note. Simple choices are unhelpful in this regard. The approach

taken in this chapter has been to assume that, even if the discourse of
imperial grandeur was sometimes subverted (especially by Ovid), it made
sense only in light of an already existing non-subversive context. It is in
this

non-subversive sense, most reliably inferred from the Res gestae, that

we can indeed analyse an ‘imperial discourse’ here. Such analysis should
not be taken to deny that, at certain points, the same language might be
53

Parad. 18 and Ling. 5.143 respectively. See TLL IX.2.916.15-30, s.v. orbis-, cf. Otto, Sprichworter und
sprichwortliche, no. 1834.

54

E.g., Ven. Fort.

Carm. 8.1.14; AratorA*. 2.1232. Cf. Oros. Hist. 1.1.14 (repeated in the same para-

graph), and Isid. Etym 9.4.3. Ovid’s elegiac style proved imitable in his own lifetime, if we are to
.

judge from supposed replies to his Heroides: Am. 2.18.27-34.
55

Diane Favro, The urban image ofAugustan Rome (Cambridge University Press, 1996); Zanker, Power
of images.

Contexts ofa discourse

216

used in subversive ways, however easy or hard it might be to identify those
56

points now.

By the time we see the discourse of empire occurring in the Augustan
age it is already full-blown, complete with the force of cliche, if we are
to judge from the tone of the comments in the poets cited above. This

might cause surprise initially, but it need not do so: there are pointers
to

it

in earlier literature, so

much so that we might regard the Augus-

tan references as an appropriation of existing tropes.

A striking passage in

Catullus clearly shows the force of hyperbole in references to the ends of the
earth:

Furius and Aurelius, Catullus’ fellow-travellers, whether he makes his way even to
far-flung India, where the coast is pounded by the far-resounding eastern wave, or
to Hyrcania and soft Arabia, or to the Sacae and arrow-bearing Parthians, or the

plains which sevenfold Nile tinges, or whether he will trudge across the lofty Alps,
to visit the memorials of great Caesar, the Gaulish Rhine, the formidable Britons,

furthermost of people. (Catullus ii.i— 12) 57

For the purposes of this poem the extremos Indos (2) are set against the
ultimos
ribiles.

Britannos (n-12), 58 who have the added feature of being horThe extract testifies to the kind of ethnographic shorthand that is
.

.

.

so much part of Augustan poetry: the use of a recurring set of adjectives,
e.g. Arabas

.

.

.

molles (5) and sagittiferos Parthos (6). Of course phrases such

as these are not limited to poetry,

but it is also true that their recurrence

in verse may be related to the creation of a poetic language, and even to

56

Alessandro Barchiesi, The poet and the prince: Ovid and Augustan discourse (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1997), brings out well the multifaceted nature of Ovid’s poetry, to take perhaps
the most ludic of the poets here discussed. See also Duncan F. Kennedy, ‘“Augustan” and “anti-

Augustan”: reflections on terms of reference’, in Roman poetry and propaganda in the age ofAugustus,
ed. Anton Powell (London: Routledge, 1992), pp. 26-58; Thomas Habinek, ‘Ovid and empire’, in

The Cambridge companion to Ovid ed. Philip Hardie (Cambridge University Press, 2002), pp. 46—61.
,

Furi etAureli, comites Catulli

57

,

siue in extremos penetrabit Indos ,
litus ut longe resonante Eoa

tunditur unda\
siue in Hyrcanos, Arabasque molles ,

seu Sacas, sagittiferos Parthos ,
siue qua septemgeminus colorat

aequora Nilus;
siue trans altos gradietur Alpes

,

Caesaris uisens monimenta magni ,

Gallicum Rhenum, horribilesque ulti-

mosque Britannos
58

See

TLL II. 2195.73-77 for the juxtaposition (mosdy in poetry) of Britain and Britons with other

people, such as Parthians and Scythians. See esp. Hor. Carm. 1.35.30 and 4.14.48.

Empire

217

the constraints of metre. 59 It is in this way that Catullus is central to the
creation and refinement of a Latin poetic language.

60

Another feature of

Catullus’ poem to note, for the purposes of comparison with later verse, is

the interplay of the private with the public: Furius and Aurelius are friends
in the private domain in the first instance, as we may safely assume, but it
is

by accompanying him to faraway places that they prove their friendship.

It is only

once he has recounted their ‘world-scale’ companionship that he

asks his friends to deliver a message to his beloved, and it is this message
that takes up the second half of the poem. The distant parts of the world are

described as Caesaris

.

.

.

monimenta magni (io): the distant parts redound

to Caesar’s credit, for they are mentioned as a means of praising him as
their conqueror. It is on this basis that we can understand references in

imperial panegyric: ‘India’ as a geographic topic is subject to an escalation

of rhetoric, as we shall see below.

I.y

The production ofimperial space: Strabo and Pliny

In a telling passage, Polybius draws an explicit link between the imperial

conquests of Alexander and the Romans on the one hand, and the

increase of topographical knowledge on the other (3.58— 59).
his own times with those of early Greek writers,

61

He contrasts

unnamed but presum-

ably Hecataeus, Herodotus and other Ionians (3.58.5). Military conquests

have opened greater possibilities than ever before of knowing the world.
This contrast, which goes some way toward vindicating the two quotations
which began this chapter, is all very well as a general principle; but, specifically, what relevance does it have to India during the Augustan age? For one
thing, this sense of military conquest as stimulating geographical knowledge

brought with it an ongoing admiration for Alexander’s conquests, not least
because he achieved with regard to the east what no Roman commander
was later to do. 6z

59

Andr6 and Filliozat, Linde
45.6), ebur Indicum (Hor.

60

p. 17, point to the ‘banalite' of formulae such as India tosta (Catull.
Carm. 1.31.6), and Indiae conchae (Prop. 1.8.39).
,

Gordon Williams, Tradition and originality in Roman poetry (Oxford: Clarendon, 1968), pp. 701-2;
Gian Biagio Conte, Latin literature: a history (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994),
pp. 142-52.

61

This passage may have been written for a second edition: F. W. Walbank, A historical commentary
on Polybius (Oxford: Clarendon, 1957), vol. I, pp. 393-4 ad loc.; see also Clarke, Between geography

and history, p. hi.
62

Johannes Engels, ‘Die Geschichte des Alexanderzuges und das Bild Alexanders des Grossen in
Strabons Geographika - Zur Interpretation der augusteischen Kulturgeographie Strabons als Quelle
seiner historischen Auffassungen’, in Alexander der Grosse, ed. Wolfgang Will (1998), pp. 131-71.

Contexts ofa discourse

2l8

We should consider Strabo, Pomponius Mela and Pliny to assess to
what degree their geographies are texts of the Roman empire, on the lines
suggested by Polybius. In taking the oikoumene as his subject, Strabo’s
project matches the world histories of his contemporaries Pompeius Trogus,
Nicolaus of Damascus and Diodorus Siculus 63 The profusion of such
intellectual projects around this time cannot be considered a coincidence,
.

but rather suggests that the discourse of empire at this time gained new force.

Furthermore, Pliny, writing several decades later, is manifestly aware of
Alexander’s precedent, hence the comment about ‘following in his footsteps’
in order to describe India (Chapter i above). So much of the descriptions of

India and Indians themselves concern matters that are of military interest:
the location of rivers, mountains and settlements; among fauna the elephant

was an important aspect of warfare in India, in the Hellenistic period at
least

64
.

What is more, recent scholarship on the Natural history have tended

to view Pliny’s geographical books as an intellectual project in its own right,

rather than an accumulation of details that are more or less accurate: he

‘providing a general picture of the world as a whole ’. 65 While Strabo
and Pliny focus, in the first instance, on the ‘world’ at large, there is a
is

subtext of empire that runs through them; both works are unthinkable for,
the early first century bc. At the very least, it cannot be denied that
Rome’s political ascendancy in the Mediterranean breathed new life into

say,

world-scale geographical and historical writing

66
.

The point here is clear, but how far does it take us in trying to understand
texts of such magnitude as Strabo’s Geography and Pliny’s Natural history ? 67

Certainly,

nobody will deny that they are both texts of their time, and

articulations of long traditions of scholarship.

When they survey the orbis

terrarum or oikoumene, it is the inhabited world rather than merely the

Roman empire. There seems to be, at some level, a false consciousness in
this, as if one is speciously passed off for the other. Whatever the physical

63

Alonso- Nunez, ‘Augustan world history’, 56; more generally, Katherine Clarke, ‘Universal perspectives in historiography, in

The limits of historiography: genre and narrative in ancient historical texts

,

ed. Christina Shuttleworth Kraus (Leiden: Brill, 1999), pp. 249-79.
64

Scullard, Elephant.

65

Sallmann, Geographic

,

66

p. 191;

Beagon, Roman nature

,

esp. p. 189 n. 50.

The older approach is

exemplified by J. Oliver Thomson, History ofancient geography (Cambridge University Press, 1948),
pp. 226-8; for more recent scholarship on Pliny, see Chapter 2, section I.3 above.
To the question of the connection between empire and geography we shall return at the end of this

book.
67

Conte, ‘Inventory of the world’, in Genres and readers
little to justify his title. Beagon,

,

esp. p. 74: but the essay offers surprisingly

Roman nature pp. 187-90, offers good evidence for the link between
,

Pliny’s scholarship and Rome’s political ascendancy; cf. Purcell, ‘Maps’.

,

Empire

219

form of Agrippa’s map, it does seem to have expressed the full sweep of the
orbis terrarum, well beyond the formal limits of empire.

On the face of it, there is no problem in connecting Roman geography
with the interests and practice of empire. Both Strabo and Pliny played a
role in the Roman military, and both of them travelled far and wide in the

course of military service 68 Certainly Pliny was well aware of Agrippa as
.

a source of topographical information,

and in fact the Natural history is
one of the main sources in reconstructing Agrippa’s supposed map 69 Both
.

Pliny and Strabo speak of Alexander as a military figure whose conquests
‘opened up’ a wider world for inquiries such as theirs 70 These are important
.

and obvious senses of empire embedded in their texts. Yet, that said, the
texts themselves are less than helpful in clarifying the explicit connection

between science and military activity. For all the travelling that we know
him to have done, Pliny relies much more on the authority of book-learning
than on his own experience 71
.

I.4. Policy

and propaganda

Thus far we have considered the rhetoric of empire at the time of Augustus,
and the role of India within that rhetoric. At this point, we should take
a moment to consider more broadly the political and military realities to
which it relates. There is a larger historical question we cannot escape: how
seriously are we to take the assertions of future conquest? Quite seriously,

Brunt would have us believe, in a provocative article that reopened the
question of Roman expansionism and continues to be cited with regularity

.

68

72

Earlier scholars, notably Mommsen, strenuously maintained that

From the Natural history itself we do know that Pliny saw service at the source of the Danube
(31.25), near the mouth of the Rhine, extremoque in margine imperii (12.98), and elsewhere; see also
It has generally been thought that Pliny’s lost work on

31.20 and 16.2 (territory of the Chauci).

Germany formed the source for Tacitus’ Germania (Syme, Tacitus, p. 127). If this is so, then Tacitus’
Pliny is completely lost to us. (Subsequent service also took him as far afield as Judaea, Syria, Gallia
Narbonensis, Africa, Hispania Tarraconensis and Gallia Belgica. Yet autopsy, and the first person in
general, play very little part in the HN: Beagon, Roman nature, pp. 2—6.) Pliny’s life is discussed in

Chapter 2, section 1 3 above.
.

69

Kai Brodersen, Terra Cognita. Studien zur romischen Raumerfassung, 2nd edn (Hildesheim: Olms,
2003), pp. 268-85, argues that this was an epigraphic monument; for the more conventional interpretation, giving greater significance to the visual dimension, see Nicolet, Space, geography,

pp. 95-122,

and Dilke, Greek and Roman maps, pp. 41-52.
70

Cf. Chapter 1, section II.

71

Shaw, ‘Elder Pliny’, 431-2, and Sallmann, Geographic esp. pp. 27-34 on Pliny’s Mosaikstil.

72

Peter Brunt, ‘Roman imperialism’, in his Roman imperial themes, pp. 96-109, a review of Hans D.

Meyer, Die Aussenpolitik des Augustus, reprinted from JRS 53 (1963), 170-6.

220

Contexts ofa discourse

Augustus’ goals were limited 73 This has been questioned by a number of
.

scholars in the latter part of this century 74 Isaac’s influential study of the
.

Roman presence in the eastern Mediterranean in the first centuries ad presupposes a degree of military aggression, and may be regarded as typical of
more recent approaches to the topic.
That said, it is difficult to point to any indication of Roman military
interest in India. The kind of references we have seen, and those we shall
see later in this chapter, tend to be very much on the level of the ideological
rather than the strategic. By the same token, the few representations of India
in maps and in geographical literature are on the large scale, on world maps,
rather than regional or municipal 75
.

No serious thought about military

topographies of India can be entertained. Indeed

it

would be perverse

to view the geographical and cartographic material on India in a strictly

military light. If the question of ‘military maps’ is a difficult one in any case,

and prone to a prioristic exaggeration on the part of modern scholars 76
,

then it is not so much an issue with regard to India. The closest we come
to seeing India on a Roman military map is in the Peutinger map. This

survives in a Colmar manuscript from the thirteenth century, but shows

strong evidence of a fourth-century original, and even deeper roots 77 It is
.

unlikely, however, that a military context can account for all the features of

the existing map; rather, it is possible that other kinds of travel, not least

commercial, may have played their part as well in determining the places,
routes, natural features and distances indicated. Despite these caveats, it is

important to note that it does stretch as far as India and Taprobane on its
far right-hand side: whatever the constituent parts, the final product in its

thirteenth-century form does indicate a universe stretching from the Straits
73

On similar lines, E. Badian, Roman imperialism in the late republic 2nd edn (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1968). On the other hand, W. V. Harris, War and imperialism in republican Rome, $27-70
BC (Oxford: Clarendon, 1979), argues for the fundamental expansiveness of the Roman state. Cf.
,

Josiah Ober, ‘Tiberius and the political testament of Augustus’, Historia 31 (1982), 306-28.
74 It is in no sense surprising that the postwar period, not least the period of decolonisation, has seen

such a strong move to re-evaluate Roman ‘imperialism’: from a variety of perspectives, Dialogues

,

ed. Mattingly, and Majeed, ‘Comparativism’, update Brunt’s 1963 article. The considerable history

of scholarship on this subject is very substantial and cannot be considered here in any detail.
75

Brodersen, Terra Cognita helpfully divides Roman spatial thinking into these three registers.
,

76

See A. C. Bertrand, ‘Stumbling through Gaul: maps, intelligence and Caesar’s Bellum Gallicum\

AHB 11 (1997), 107-22; cf. N. J. E. Austin and Boris Rankov, Exploratio: military and political
intelligence in the Roman

world from the second Punic War to the Battle of Adrianople (London:

Routledge, 1995).
77

The edition of Konrad Miller, Itineraria Romana. Romische Reisewege an der Hand der Tabula
Peutingeriana (Stuttgart: Strecker und Schroder, 1916), though often reprinted, is unreliable: Richard
Talbert, ‘Cartography and taste in Peutinger’s Roman map’, in Space in the Roman world: its perception

and presentation, ed. Richard Talbert and Kai Brodersen (Munster: Lit, 2004), pp. 113-41, including
bibliography.

Empire

221

of Gibraltar in the west to India in the east. 78 In this respect it matches the
expanse plotted out in the Pliny passage at the start of this chapter.
In sum, no military context can be detected here; we are dealing instead

with imperial discourse that is somewhat removed from practice. It cannot
be seriously maintained that the military conquest of India was a practicable
possibility: the sheer distance between it and Italy, with the many attendant

issues

of transportation, makes this hard to imagine except in the most

fanciful way.

Even if there were some degree of Roman military presence

in the Arabian peninsula and especially in the Nile valley from the end of

the first century bc through the end of antiquity, 79 it does not follow that

troops in sufficient numbers could have been transported to the Indian

subcontinent.

We pass now to a case, some one hundred years after Augustus, which
clearly shows the paradox we have already seen: that the prospect of con-

quering India militarily was as desirable in principle as it was unrealistic in
practice.

I.$.

Trajan s Parthian campaign

Cassius Dio offers the evocative picture of an ageing emperor having arrived
at the head of the Persian Gulf, watching a ship sail to India, and regretting

that his ambitions of conquest were now thwarted by the onset of old age

and illness:
Then he arrived at the ocean itself, and having found out about its nature and
having caught sight of a ship setting sail for India, he said he would definitely have
crossed over to the Indians, were he still young. He began to cogitate the Indians

and inquired into their affairs, and he deemed Alexander blessed. (Cassius Dio
68.29.1)

80

This episode is part of Trajan’s Parthian campaign, dating to the summer
of 116, just over a year before his death while returning to Rome. Whether
or not we should take this anecdote at face value, there is no doubt that the

78

‘Did indicate’ is the more accurate expression in this case, given that the furthest segment(s) on the

map) has/have been lost: Ekkehard Weber (ed.), TabuLa Peutingeriana.
Codex Vindobonensis 324, 2 vols. (Graz: Akademische Druck- und Verlaganstalt, 1976), vol. II, p. 40,

left (the Iberian west of the

with Talbert, ‘Cartography and taste’, pp. 119-20.
79

Bowersock, Roman Arabia Fergus Millar, The Roman Near East, 31 bc-ad 33/ (Cambridge, MA:
;

80

Harvard University Press, 1993), ch. 11.
K&vteuOev ett’ ccutov tov cokeovov eAOcov, tt)v te <f>uorv auroO KorrakiaQcbv Kai ttAoTov ti es
’Iv8iav ttAeov 18 cbv, eTttev oti iravTcos av Kai etti tous ’IvSous, si veos eti fjv, EiTEpaicbOTiv. ’lv8ous

te yap evevoei, Kai Ta ekeivgov trpaypiaTa EiroAuTtpaynovEi, tov te ’AAs£av8pov EjiaKapi^E. Cf.
Millar, ‘Looking east’, 507.

222

Contexts ofa discourse

emperor, known in his own reign as optimus princeps, was a keen emulator

of Alexander.

81

Before turning westwards, Trajan in fact first travelled up the

Euphrates to Babylon, to visit the tomb ofSemiramis and to make a sacrifice
at the house where Alexander died.
first

82

It is

no accident that Trajan was the

Roman emperor to have been born outside of Italy, in southern Spain:

this fact alone goes

some way towards explaining the geographic extent

of Trajan’s activities. Apart from anything else, Dio’s anecdote, written
a century after the event, strikingly combines commercial

and military

interests.

Two texts from the later fourth century suggest more strongly, if less
poignantly, that Trajan’s plans extended as far as India. Rufus Festus says
that Trajan, having secured the finest part of Persia, Seleucia, Ctesiphon

and Babylonia, advanced as far as the boundary of India, in Alexander’s
footsteps’ ( Breuiarium 20). 83 Festus’ contemporary Eutropius says much the
same thing, though without mentioning Alexander (8.3.2). To these authors

we shall return in section 1.6 below, but for the present we should note
their impact on later writing. When the sixth-century historian Jordanes
produces his own version, based in part on these writers, he explicitly

imputes Indian ambitions to Trajan: he set up a fleet ‘from which to conquer
Indian lands’ ( Romana 268). 84

The extent of Trajan’s motives is less at issue here than the rhetoric
involved in the campaign and its subsequent representation. What such
stories do show is that eastern campaigns in the imperial period are readily connected with India,

even if the exaggeration involved is conscious.

Thus, when Eucian in his treatise, How to write history (section 31), scorns

contemporary historians for their haste to narrate Lucius Verus’ Parthian

campaign of ad 162-66, he complains that they have already written of
future events, such as the capture of the Parthian king Vologeses III (section 31). 85 The preface to an Indica has already been completed. The details

of the campaign require authentication, but this they are about to receive in

81

See F. A. Lepper, Trajan’s Parthian war (Oxford: Clarendon, 1948), pp. 34-9, on the chronology of

On his Oriens coins, Harold Mattingly, Coins of the Roman empire in the British

his use of titles.

Museum. Vol. Ill, Nerva to Hadrian (London: British Museum, 1936), p. lxxxxvi. His presentation
of himself as Hercules may imply a link with Alexander: Julian Bennett, Trajan optimus princeps
2nd edn (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2001), p. 72.
,

82
83

Bennett, Trajan

,

,

p. 199.

usque ad Indiae fines post Alexandrum accessit. Festus proceeds to say that Trajan set up a fleet, on

which point scholars have disagreed: J. W. Eadie, The Breviarium of Festus: a critical edition with
historical commentary (London: Athlone, 1967), pp. 139-40.
84

nec non et in mari ruhro classem, unde Indiae fines uastaret, instituit ibique suam statuam dedicauit.

The statue Trajan erected there was apparently still standing by the late sixth century: The Roman
empire: Augustus to Hadrian ed. Robert K. Sherk (Cambridge University Press, 1988), p. 138.
,

85

On the war, A. R. Birley, ‘Hadrian to the Antonines’, CAHX1 2nd edn, pp. 132—94, at 160-5.
,

Empire

223

the form of letters received from Muziris and the Oxydraci in India. With

mention of these letters Lucian sounds a novelistic note, comparable with
the many letters woven into the Alexander Romanced

An interesting element of Lucian’s comments is their temporality: part
of the offence caused by these historians is that, in their enthusiasm to
flatter the emperor, they get ahead of themselves.

The thinly veiled allusion

to Alexander is assured by the reference to the circumnavigation of the

outer sea (31). The implication is that these historians are flattering the

emperor, not unlike the way in which Alexander was flattered by several

contemporaries (5). 87 Part of the background to this is that contemporary
history was subject to more stringent tests than were accounts of the more

remote past.

00

As the case of Trajan shows, the imperial sense of India is intensely
concerned with Alexander’s conquests. But then the focus is less on the
exact details of the empire actually created by Alexander; what matters here
is

that its distant location brings glory to a great man. The near absence of

the Indo-Greeks in the later literary records may be regarded as proof of
this.

89

It suited the rhetoric of empire

much better that India was radically

other than that Ai Khanum had a theatre and a gymnasium. India is here
less important in its

own right than as the crowning glory of success against

the Parthians, or later Sasanians. For Lucian in Hotu to write history , the

precedent of Alexander makes India effectively the reductio ad absurdum of
history written to flatter the emperor.

1.6.

Itinerarium Alexandri

The case ofTrajan’s Parthian campaign shows that Alexander provided a lens
through which to consider India. In this regard, Trajan provides a strong

Both Rufus Festus and Eutropius were writing
around 369-70, at a time when the emperor Valens was contemplating an
link into later antiquity.

eastern campaign. This was in fact to prove his undoing, culminating with

the massive defeat at the hands of the Goths at Adrianople (378). Noel
Lenski’s recent study suggests that these works were written not merely to

provide incitement for the emperor to proceed, but also ‘practical guides
to Rome’s historical claims to the territories of the east’. 90 In this light,

86

Patricia A. Rosenmeyer, Ancient epistolaryfictions: the letter in Greek literature (Cambridge University
Press, 20or), pp. 169-92.
88

87

Cf. Chapter 1, section II. 1 above.

89

The meagre literary sources given by Holt, Thundering Zeus. pp. 174—84, constitute the exception.
Failure of empire: Valens and the Roman state in the fourth century ad (Berkeley: University of

90

California Press, 2002), p. t92.

Luce, ‘Bias’.

224

Contexts ofa discourse

the references to India by Rufus Festus and Eutropius, though brief and

arguably fanciful, cry out to be seen in the light of the politics of their
authors’ time.
It was the figure of Trajan

that had been invoked, in another historical

work a few decades earlier, again with an implied connection to India. The
Itinerarium Alexandri was written by the courtier Flavius Polemius, and

dedicated to the emperor Constantius II. The year, 340, is significant, since
it

was the very time Constantius was preparing for war against the Sasanians.

Despite the initial promise of a geographical account ( itinerarium ), the work
is in fact a

potted twofold biography of Alexander and Trajan, of which the

Trajanic narrative is now lost. It begins:

My lord Constantius, who is better even than good emperors,

I,

thinking it par-

ticularly beneficial, both as an omen for you and as an incentive for future people,
if I were to compose a Persian campaign, a glorious account of emperors engaged

in the same undertaking, but now already favourably undertaken and dispatched,

namely of Alexander the Great and Trajan, [I] acceded most willingly, desirous of
the task, because indeed it demands that I wish this, and because the successes of
rulers encourage others to match them,

(i)

9'

There is some evidence to suggest that this text enjoyed renewed interest in
362/3, to encourage the young emperor Julian on his eastward expedition.

Even if Julian’s attitude to Alexander, as expressed in his writings, was
ambiguous, it does appear that from this time he became preoccupied
with Alexander’s eastern conquests, to the degree that it cut him off from
reality.

92

It is true that, in the late republic, imitation of Alexander had been
something of a mixed blessing. As Augustus was well aware, its political

implications required caution in manipulating. 93 It is also true that there

was a negative element to the manner in which philosophers such as Seneca

91

dextrum admodum sciens et omine tibi et magisterio futurorum, domine Constanti, bonis melior imperator, si orsofeliciter

iam accinctoque Persicam expeditionem itinerarium principum eodem opere gloriosum,

Alexandri scilicet Magni Traianique, componerem, libens sane et laboris cum amore succubui, quod qui-

dem meum uelle enim id et exigit sui pensique est, quodque regentium prospera in partem subditos uocant.
Ed. Raffaella Tabacco (Citta di Castello: Olschki, 2000).
92

93

Polymnia Athanassiadi, /a/t'an and Hellenism (Oxford: Clarendon, 1981), pp. 224-5; RJ. Lane Fox,
‘The itinerary of Alexander: Constantius to Julian’, CQ 47 (1997), 239-52.
Peter Green, ‘Caesar and Alexander: aemuUtio, imitatio, comparatio’, AJAH
3 (1978), 1-26; and
E. Gruen, ‘Rome and the image of Alexander’, in Ancient history in a modern university, ed. T. W.
Hillard et al. (North Ryde, NSW: Macquarie University Press, 1998), pp. 178-91, apdy warn against
overestimating the extent of imitatio Alexandri in the late Republic, but they cannot explain away all

the evidence for Augustus: Dietmar Kienast, ‘Augustus und Alexander’, Gymnasium

76 (1969), 43-

56. Still fundamental is A. Heuss, ‘Alexander der Grosse und die politische Ideologic des Altertums’,

A&A 4 (1954), 65-104.

,

Empire

225

viewed Alexander, an exemplum of excessive ambition 94 What we see in
.

later antiquity

a whitewashed Alexander, the philosopher-king of the

is

Alexander Romance rather than Seneca’s drunken megalomaniac. It is this
later

Roman memory of Alexander that is expressed in the Peutinger map,

where one of the farthermost eastern places is designated as Alexander’s
turning point and marked as such by an oracle 95 This is, in any case, a
.

distended India that blends into Scythian territory. If the Peutinger map

harbours various sources from the late Republic into the mid-fourth century, this particular feature reflects, in the first instance, the late-antique

memory of Alexander. Medieval versions of Alexander’s interview with the
Brahmans gave later authors the opportunity to show the conqueror learning humility, and on this basis he was sometimes presented as a pilgrim in
search of wisdom 96 The figure of Alexander was thus a bridge between the
.

learned cultures of antiquity and the western Middle Ages, but one that

underwent considerable metamorphosis in the process.

To this we might add the lively folk traditions of Alexander elsewhere, in
a wide variety of regions. These can be most readily substantiated in the case

of the western Middle Ages 97 with the enormously wide diffusion of the
,

Alexander Romance in a number of languages of the Mediterranean basin 98
.

Beyond the classical canon, we find substantial Alexander traditions in the
Iranian world 99 and the Midrash attests to his presence in medieval Jewish
100
tradition
However varied this range of texts and traditions, the point
;

.

94

Notably Sen. ep. 53.10; 59.12; 83.19. Richard Stoneman, ‘The legacy of Alexander in ancient philosophy, in Brill's companion to Alexander the Great ed. Joseph Roisman (Leiden: Brill, 2003), pp.
325-45, illustrates the varied uses of Alexander as a philosophic or rhetorical exemplum. Cf. Diana

Spencer, The Roman Alexander, pp. 89-93.
95

hie Alexander responsum accepit: 'Usque quo AlexanderC'Wtte Alexander received the [oracular] reply:

“How far are you going, Alexander?’” The oracular saying, found also in the Ravenna Cosmography,
is

part of later tradition: Miller, Itineraria Romana, p. 838.

96

See further Chapter 6, section III. 2.

97

George Cary, The medieval Alexander (Cambridge University Press, 1956); C. Frugoni, La fortuna
di Alessandro magno dall' Antichita al Medioevo (Florence: La nuova Italia, 1978);

D. J. A. Ross,

Alexander historiatus: a guide to medieval illustrated Alexander literature (Frankfurt am Main: Lang,
e

1988); Danielle Lecoq, ‘L’image d’Alexandre k travers les mappemondes medievales (XII -XIII

e

)’,

Geographia antiqua 2 (1993), 63-103.
98

Fraser, Cities ofAlexander, pp. 205-26, on the genealogy of the Alexander Romance up to the earliest

surviving Greek text.
99

John H. Marks, Visions of one world: legacy ofAlexander (Guilford, CT: Four Quarters, 1985). In
Persian versions of the Alexander romance, Alexander is usually but not always positively portrayed.

In some instances, he is identified with Du’l-Qarnayn, the ‘two-horned’ prophet of the Koran
(16:84). For further discussion, William L. Hanaway, ‘Eskanar-nama’, Encyclopaedia Iranica (1998);

Faustina C. W. Doufikar-Aerts, ‘A legacy of the Alexander Romance in Arab writings: Al-Iskandar,

founder of Alexandria’, in The search for the ancient novel, ed. Tatum, pp. 323-43.
100

To take an example from late-antique Judaism, Alexander as judge is sympathetic to the Jews: The
Babylonian Talmud: Seder Nezikin, four vols., ed. Isidore Epstein et al. (London: Soncino, 1935),
vol. Ill, pp. 608-10.

Empire
is

227

clear: if neither the Alexander histories nor the Greco-Roman Alexander

Romance tradition had any monopoly on the Macedonian king, then it is
unfair to expect that imitation of Alexander was pursued by Roman leaders
as a kind of ‘package deal’.

We are dealing with someone who intensely

manipulated his own public image, and hence it is important to emphasise
the variety of tones with which Alexander resonated in Roman imperial
history. If India was often part of the memory of Alexander in the Middle

Ages, then that changed form commensurately.

II.

CHRISTIAN TOPOGRAPHY, CHRISTIAN EMPIRE

Now that we have seen representations of world empire in the Augustan
age and somewhat later, we are well placed to consider the same set of

Roman history. We are dealing with the later
Roman period, in a series of Christian texts: now if the ‘Christianisation of

features at a later point in

time’ has been well described, the corresponding Christianisation of space

has not received equal attention, beyond the smaller scale of holy places in
Palestine and elsewhere

101
.

But this is worth considering in similarly broad

terms, if we are to try to grasp what India meant to Romans of the later

empire.

The T-O map is most readily associated with Isidore: in this schema, the
inhabited earth is represented as aT-shape within a circle (‘O’) representing
the surrounding Ocean;

Europe and Africa fill up the lower quadrants,

together matching the extent of Asia, represented by the upper semicircle.
First, Isidore in his

Etymologiae or Origines describes an orbis terrarum

that can be pictorially represented in this fashion; secondly, manuscripts

of his work from the eighth and ninth centuries actually include such
diagrams, many of them extremely schematic and simple. While Isidore is

extremely important to our story, not least for the proximity of India to the
earthly paradise in the western medieval tradition, we must consider earlier

manifestations of this worldview, including Orosius, another author much

read and copied in the western Middle Ages.
In what we may regard as a key text of the period immediately after
the conversion of Constantine, Eusebius of Caesarea offers a history of
the world, stretching back into the distant past and culminating in the

triumphal present. There
101

is

a breadth of vision implicit in Eusebius’

E.g., E. D. Hunt, Holy land pilgrimage in the later Roman empire (Oxford: Clarendon, 1982); Peter

Brown, The cult ofthe saints (University of Chicago Press, 1981); Beatrice Caseau, ‘Sacred landscapes’,
in G. W. Bowersock et al. (eds.), Late antiquity: a guide to the postclassical world (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1998), pp. 21-59.

228

Contexts ofa discourse

scheme, and a confident tone of its formulation. In this respect he must be
considered alongside the earlier Christian chronographer Julius Africanus
102

(c. 160—C. 240).
But it was Eusebius’ work that was translated by Jerome
into Latin, and would in that form reach many readers in the west. Some

earlier Christian writers had shown a certain ambivalence, or even cautious

optimism about the Roman empire as a political unit; perhaps the major103

ity had been openly hostile.
For Eusebius, the conversion of the Roman
empire under Constantine was the result of divine providence. In the course

of this narrative he offers, in effect, a Christianisadon of history, by writing
a history that embraced both Judaeo-Christian and Greco-Roman pasts.
This is a key moment in the creation of a Christian discourse, a key step
in the gaining of ‘power over the past’. 104 Several decades later Augustine
in his City of God shows himself heir to this

conception of human hishowever much that may have been refracted by the military threats
now facing the empire. 103 Beyond the fourth century this model was to
tory,

prove strikingly resilient, with a long history in the medieval west, as is
shown, for example, in the thirteenth-century Hereford map. But it is less
to Augustine than to his pupil Orosius that we must turn if we wish to grasp

the place of world empire, geographically understood, in this new Christian schema. At this broadest level, the Christianisadon of space in Orosius and others requires consideration, parallel to the ‘Christianisadon of

time’.

106

What we shall see here in the fourth and early fifth centuries is the tendency of Christians to appropriate the language of Roman (and especially
Augustan) public life, not least their military and political symbols of success, in asserting their

own achievement following Constantine’s conversion

to Christianity. However much the political circumstances of the western

Roman empire may have differed by the time of Isidore, the cosmological paradigm had already been established,
102

and was in essence to remain

Africanus survives only in the fragments preserved in George Syncellus’ eighth-century Ecloga
chronographia. For a consideration of Africanus, together with Eusebius, in the light of the problem

of primordial history’, see William Adler, Time immemorial: archaic history and its sources in Christian
chronographyfrom Julius Africanus to George Syncellus ( Washington: Dumbarton Oaks,
71
103

1989), pp. 43-

-

Theodor E. Mommsen, Medieval and Renaissance studies (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1959),
pp. 267-9.

104

Averil Cameron, Christianity and the rhetoric of empire (Berkeley: University of California Press,
I

99 I ), PP- 120—54. The book is much influenced by Michel Foucaults concept of a ‘totalising

discourse’, though it is concerned more with society than with individuals.
105

Brown, Augustine of Hippo (London: Faber, 1967), pp. 299-312; Noel Lenski, ‘Initium
mali Romano populo-. contemporary reactions to the Battle of Adrianople’, TAPhA 127
Peter

(1997),

129-68.
106

R. A. Markus, The end of ancient Christianity (Cambridge University Press,

1990), pp. 85—135.

Empire

229

thus to the later Middle Ages, in fact up to the time of the New World
discoveries.

107

II. 1.

The western tradition ofOrosius and Isidore

Born in Spain around 390, Orosius wrote Historiae adversus paganos in
seven books, embracing the entire sweep of human history: the first six
books range from Adam, i.e. the beginnings, to the birth of Christ, and the
seventh takes the story down to ad 4x7, which we may regard as the work’s
immediate terminus post quern. We see here a providential conception of
history, valorising divine intervention at the expense of individual human

agency (esp. 2.2.4). Unlike Augustine, he regarded the Roman empire, the
last

of the four world empires, as being part of God’s plan, for it facili-

tated Christian missionary activity.

108

The fact that Christ was born at a

time when peace reigned in the world, and Augustus ruled most of it, was
auspicious. And unlike Salvian of Marseilles, writing his De gubernatione

Dei some thirty-five years later, Orosius was optimistic about the ‘barbarian threat’: he was hopeful that these foreigners would yet be integrated

into Roman society. 109 This is a true universal history in its self-conscious

adoption of a series of different scenes of historical narration, taking into
account the perspective of both Romans and non-Romans.

110

This was a

major work in the creation of Christian history, especially if we consider
the enormous influence it was to exercise in the medieval west.

111

But it is

primarily to the geographical aspects of his work that we must turn our
attention.

Orosius’ universe is tripartite: of the three continents, Asia, Africa and

Europe, Asia matches the other two for extent.

107

111

This opening articulation

Anthony Pagden, Thefall ofnatural man: the American Indian and the origins ofcomparative ethnology
(Cambridge University Press, 1982). Grafton, New worlds Romm, Edges.
;

108

The three world empires before the Romans were those of the Babylonians, Macedonians and
Africans (Carthaginians). The scheme of four world empires, articulated in heightened expectation of a decisive fifth, can be traced back to the mid-second century and the Jewish struggle
against Antiochus IV ( Daniel 2:31-45 and 7:1-14): see Joseph Ward Swain, ‘The theory of the four

monarchies’, Cl. Phil. 35 (1940), 1—21, 20-1 on Orosius.
109

For a consideration of Orosius and Salvian side by side, see Francois Paschoud, Roma Aeterna.
Etudes sur le patriotisme romain dans I'occident latin A Tepoque des grandes invasions (Rome: Institut
suisse, 1967), pp. 276—310.

110
111

Explicitly articulated at 5.1.3. See further, T. E. Mommsen, Medieval and Renaissance Studies , p. 334.

On Orosius’ impact on medieval mapmaking, David Woodward, ‘Medieval Mappaemundi
History of cartography ed. Harley and Woodward, vol.
,

I,

’,

in

pp. 286-370, at 300-1; Evelyn Edson,

Mapping time and space: how medieval mapmakers viewed their world (London: British Library,
1997). PP- 3 2_ 5112

At 1.2.1. For the same idea expressed some two centuries later Isid., Orig. 14.3.3.

230

Contexts ofa discourse

of universal space leads up to an account of the ‘local disasters of individual
nations that arose in an unending stream from the beginning’. They arose

from Original Sin, as he goes on to explain right away in 1.3: in fact, it is
no exaggeration that the description of the world brings home the point of
Original Sin as a central theological concept in his history. In this respect

Orosius closely follows Augustine. 113
India, which is part of Asia, is bounded by the Indus on the west, the
Caucasus on the north; the Eastern and Indian oceans on the other sides.
It

contains forty-four peoples, not including those living in Taprobane or

on the other densely populated islands:
In this territory [of Asia] lies India, whose western boundary is the Indus River,
which empties into the Red Sea, and whose northern boundary is constituted by
the Caucasian mountain; the other sides ... are bounded by the Eastern and the

Indian oceans. This land has forty-four groups, excluding both those who dwell

on the island of Taprobane, which has ten cities, and those who live on the very

many other inhabited islands. (1.2.15) 114
As such India is for Orosius literally at the ends of the earth, and as we
shall see below it is later to be contrasted with the western Mediterranean
world. Even in this briefest of surveys, its populousness is mentioned, 5
and indeed extended to Taprobane and the other surrounding islands as
1'

well.

India enters the stage of world history when the Assyrian queen Semiramis invaded it. ‘Nobody had ever entered India’ except Semiramis herself and

Alexander."

6

This

detail

is

subject to an intensely moralistic

interpretation:

At that time it was an even more cruel and serious matter to persecute and massacre
peoples living peacefully than it is today; for in those days there were no such
passions for warfare abroad nor was there such practice of lusts at home. (1.4.6)" 7

As if extracting full value from his narrative of Semiramis’ and later Bacchus’
bloody conquests (1.9), Orosius emphasises that the Indians were themselves peace-loving and non-aggressive.

113

What had begun as propaganda

Brown, Augustine pp. 388-90.
,

114

in his [sc. Asiae] finibus India est, quae habet ab occidente flumen Indum, quod Rubro mari accipitur, a
septentrione montem Caucasum ; reliqua, a Eoo et Indico oceano terminatur. haec habet gentes XLIIII,

absque insula Taprobane, quae habet decern ciuitates, et absque reliquis insulis habitabilibus plurimis.
115

For populousness as a feature of descriptions of India, see also Chapter 2, section II.i.

116

Indis quoque bellum intulit, quos praeter illam etAIexandrum Magnum nullus intrauit. (1.4.5)

117

quod eo tempore ideo crudelius grauiusque erat quam nunc est, persequi et trucidare populos in pace
uiuentes, quia tunc apud illos nec foris erant ulla incendia bellorum, nec domi tanta exercitia cupiditatum.

Empire

231

8
around the time of Alexander’s conquests" was now to win a fixed place
in the Christian master-narrative of world history.
Bacchus’ subjugation of India is seen alongside the plagues and wars

suffered by Ethiopians (1.9.3) and Egyptians (1.10.1— 18). Again, by the law of

Original Sin all people deserve punishment, though the Indians themselves
are peaceful and lacking in aggression:
Father Bacchus subdued India and drenched it with blood, filled it with carnage
and violated it with lusts - even though the people of India never offended others,
and were contented merely with the quiet lives of slaves. (1.9.4) 119

Orosius makes no mention of Brahmans and other holy people, but they

may well be implied in these comments about peacefulness. Such an interpretation gains weight if we remember the tendency of Augustine and other
Christians to speak about Brahmans as the archetypal Indians (Chapter 6

below).

In describing Alexander’s expedition to the east, his cruelty and ambition

come to the forefront, in moralising terms (3.19). For Orosius, as for other
epitomators of late antiquity, Alexander’s expedition did in fact take him
to the eastern Ocean, to the edge of the world: ‘he drove his chariot round

the turning post and entered Indus from Ocean and returned to Babylon’
(3. 20.1).

120

Accordingly, there is no mention of the decisive mutiny that

forced Alexander to turn back at the Hyphasis.

121

Alexander, the ‘acknowledged leader of the most distant east’, receives
embassies:

122

ambassadors from the Spaniards and Morini ‘seek him

throughout Assyria and India, visiting ends of the earth and getting to know

both oceans’. 123 In this far-fetched tale we should remember Orosius’ own

118

Bosworth, Alexander and the east, cf. Chapter i, section II. i above.

119

subactam Indiam Liber pater sanguine madefecit, caedibus oppleuit, libidinibus polluit, gentem utique

120

post quasi circumacta meta de Oceano Indum flumen ingressus, Babylonam celeriter rediit.

121

To cite another example of the tendency of later sources to speak of Alexander as actually having
reached the ends of the earth, we may compare Malalas (8.3 = 194-95 Dindorf): ‘Alexander also

nulli umquam hominum obnoxiam, uernacula tantum quiete contentam.

captured all the regions of India and their empires, taking prisoner Poros, emperor of the Indians;

he also captured all the other empires of the barbarian peoples, except the empire of the widow
Kandake’; a little later he is baldly said to have ‘conquered the world’. But it is clear that Malalas is

working with a vague sense of India, one which stretches both to Arabia (18.16 = 435) and Ethiopia
(18.5
122

= 457).

The claim that Mithridates VI extended Parthian control to India (5.4) need not be taken as
historical fact; rather, it reflects a scrambling of details about ‘the east’.

123

Hispanus et Morinus ad supplicandum Alexandro Babyloniam adiit cruentumque ultro dominum, ne
hostem exciperet, per Assyriam Indiamque quaesiuit, terrarum metas lustrans et utrique infeliciter notus

Oceano (3.20.8).

23 2

Contexts ofa discourse

Spanish origins as he matches the eastern and western edges of the earth. 124

The Morini are easily identified in Orosius’ intellectual background: they
were the Gallo-Belgic tribe mentioned at the end of the ekphrasis of the
shield of Aeneas as ‘farthermost of people’. 125 Their geographic location,
close to the Channel, thus puts them close to the ‘remotest Britons’. 126

This episode is later explicitly recalled in the context of a later world
conqueror. At 6.21 Orosius tells of embassies from Indians and Scythians
that travelled all the way to Tarraco in Hither Spain to seek out Augustus:
‘farther they could not have gone’. 127 As suppliants they begged for his
military intervention, reminding him of Alexander the Great, just as Gauls
and Spaniards had come after Alexander. In each case, we see an embassy

that attests the expanse of political power. In the broader scheme of the
work, the twin stories function as reminders that mankind everywhere,

even at these very corners of earth, is tainted with Original Sin.

By the time we get to the Etymologies of Isidore of Seville (c. 602—36),
the tripartite orbis has become orthodoxy, as the extended description at
I 4-3- I— 3 shows. In this passage in the fourteenth book on
Asia, India is
described immediately after the earthly Paradise. It is important to see here

that Paradise has a specific geographical location (14.3.2-4), something
that was to have a profound effect on later medieval worldviews. 128 The

juxtaposition of India and Paradise is not explicitly stated, it is true, but it is
directly implied by the framework and order of Isidore’s composition. The

actual content of Isidore s description of India offers little of interest in its

own right (14.3.5—7): it is very much in the Plinian tradition and predicts the
western medieval tradition of subsequent world maps. Though the specific
details of Isidore’s India are unimportant, they do mark the transition from

a verbal to a visual mode of Indography.
Isidore’s encyclopaedia as a whole incorporates several elements of Jewish
cosmology; the matter of paradise, however, is something that he transforms
124

For the prominence of the western Mediterranean in Orosius, see
J. M. Alonso-Niinez, ‘Orosius
on contemporary Spain in Studies in Latin literature and Roman history, ed. Carl Deroux (Brussels:
,

Collection Latomus, 1989), vol. V, pp. 491—507; and note

p.

495 for the parallelism of the two

episodes.
125

126

extremique hominum (Verg. Aen. 8.727).

Orosius clich£d reference to ultimi Britanni has direct precedent in Catull. 11.12 and Hor., Carm.
1.35.30 (further references at

127

TLL II. 2195. 67-77).

interea Caesarem apud Tarraconem citerioris Hispaniae urbem legati Indorum et Scytharum,
toto Orbe
transmisso tandem ibi inuenerunt, ultra quod iam quaerere non possent
Note especially 14.3.2: Paradisus est locus in orientis partibus constitutus, cuius uocabulum ex Graeco
in Latinum uertitur hortus: porro Hebraice Eden dicitur, quod in nostra lingua delicae
interpretatur.
On the swift and extensive diffusion of the Etymologiae with its substantial Spanish, Italian and
.

,

French traditions, see P. K. Marshall, ‘Isidore’, in Texts and transmission, ed. L. D. Reynolds (Oxford:
Clarendon, 1983), pp. 194-6. Isidore is explicitly mentioned in the Hereford map, as is Orosius.

Empire

233

from Persian-Greek tradition into Christian discourse. His so-called T-O

scheme of world maps is in fact closer to a ‘Y-O’ pattern, especially if we
consider the angle at which the Nile is often placed, beginning at the delta
and heading off towards one o’clock. The same can be said of many maps,
including the three major mappaemundi of the later Middle Ages, namely
the Hereford, Ebstorf and Vercelli world maps. This points to the influence
of Jewish maps, which are shaped in a Y-pattern. 129 The implications of
this were enormous. For one thing, the centring of the world on Jerusalem
meant that there was more of Asia to fill up. We sense this in the difference
in the sizes of illustrations between Europe and the outer fringes of the orbis
terrarum.

I)0

To understand the Christian tradition reflected in Orosius and Isidore
we must look back not merely to the classical sources we have already
considered, but also to some key texts of Jewish tradition. Of the various
cosmologies implicit in the Old Testament, the one that would have the
most profound effect in the medieval west was that of Noah and his sons.
This foundation text, which accounts for the peopling of the earth after the

new world order brought about by the flood, is an obvious place to start.
Genesis 10 lists Noah’s sons, Shem,

dants at some length.

Ham and Japheth, and their descen-

The genealogy that concerns us as we consider

medieval conceptions of Asia’ begins with Shem, and proceeds through

Arpachshad, Shelah, Eber, Joktan. Of the thirteen sons of Joktan named,

who ‘occupied a stretch of country from Mesha in the direction of Sephar,
the eastern mountain range’ (10:30), 131

Ophir and Havilah are the ones

that have been at various times linked with India. The precise geographical

location of the place Ophir has caused controversy over a long period: it
is

sometimes thought to be in India, sometimes in the southern Arabian

peninsula.

129

132

Philip S. Alexander, ‘Notes on the imago mundi of the Book of Jubilees’, Journal ofJewish Studies
33 (1982), 197-213;

more generally his ‘Early Jewish geography’, Anchor Bible dictionary

,

vol. II,

pp. 977-88; and Francis Schmidt, ‘Naissance d’une geographic juive’, in Moise Geographe ed. Alain
Desreumaux and Francis Schmidt (Paris: Vrin, 1988), pp. 13-30.
,

130

For example, in the Hereford map the details for Europe are given much more finely and in greater
detail, whereas, say, the sizeable representation of tower of Babylon, or indeed the ‘monstrous races’

obviates the need for fine topographic detail, textual or visual, in the more peripheral areas. Even

the holy land of Palestine, which receives a large expanse by virtue of its relation to Jerusalem, the
central point, is not accorded a great deal of detail. See further, e.g., Scott D. Westrem, The Hereford

map: a transcription of the legends with commentary (Turnhout: Brepols, 2001).
131

132

Tr. Jerusalem Bible , ed. Alexander Jones.

ABD V 26-27, s.v. ‘Ophir’ (David W. Baker), on the puzzle of location. David M. Goldenberg,
The curse of Ham: race and slavery in early Judaism, Christianity and Islam (Princeton University

Cf.

Press, 2003), esp. pp. 43, 241, puts this in a wider context while discussing the question, ‘how did

ancient Jewish society look at the black African?’ (10).

Contexts ofa discourse

234

Two different sources lie behind this passage, a Priestly (P) and a Yahwist
(J) tradition.

Of these, the P-Table has been dated to the seventh century

bc, 133 whereas the J-Table

is

older. It

accounts for Shelah, Eber, Joktan

and his thirteen sons, and offered a geographical schema to match the
genealogy.

Another passage that was to have paradigmatic force for centuries of
medieval mapmaking was the description of Paradise, in the second account
of creation ( Genesis 2). After the creation of mankind, Yahweh ‘planted a

garden in Eden which is in the east, and there he put the man he had
fashioned’ (2:8). This garden contained all kinds of tree, including the tree

of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. The description of
its rivers is

worth close attention, for they were to provide readers with the

ostensible possibility of fixing a locality for Eden:

A river flowed from Eden to water the garden, and from there it divided to make
four streams. (2:10) The first is named the Pishon, and this encircles the whole

land of Havilah where there is gold. (2:11) The gold of this land is pure; bdellium

and onyx stone are found there. (2:12) The second river is named the Gihon, and
this encircles the whole land of Cush. (2:13) The third river is named the Tigris,
and this flows to the east of Ashur. The fourth river is the Euphrates. (2:14)

The Hebrew river-names Perat and Hiddeqel correspond without any difficulty to the Euphrates and Tigris, as they have been translated above; but

the other two rivers emerging in the garden, the Gihon and Pishon, are
less easily located. As a broad region,

nonetheless, this region of the ‘east’

{Gen. 2:8) seems to be Armenia, which we might therefore identify with
the eastern edge of the world. In so far as precious stones occur here, this

presentation of Paradise emphasises commodities.

Taken together the two passages quoted above, though ‘they reflect first
and foremost the world of the west, and only indirectly external geograph134

ical space’,
cannot be overemphasised in tracing medieval worldviews,
within a chronological sweep that includes both Orosius and the Hereford

map. These may be the closest the Old Testament itself comes to offering
an explicit set of geographic co-ordinates on a large scale.

An expanded reworking of the Table of Nations in Genesis 10 was made
around 100 bc by the anonymous author of the Book ofJubilees (chapters 8-10). 135

133

Alexander,
134
135

The work survives in Ethiopic, into which it was translated

E. A. Speiser (ed.),

ABD

The Anchor Bible I: Genesis (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1964), pp. 64-72;

I 980; cf. Oxford Study Bible.
Alexander, ‘Early Jewish geography’, p. 978.

In what follows I rely on James H. Charlesworth, The Old Testament Pseudepigrap ha (Garden City,

NY: Doubleday, 1983), pp. 1-7.

.

Empire

235

from Greek, though it was probably written originally in Hebrew. Some
fragments survive in Hebrew and Latin. It stands out among the Jewish
apocrypha for the prominence it devotes to chronology. When compared
to the Genesis-Exodus narrative, its augmentations can be identified as coming from Jewish folklore. It was known to fourth-century Christians, for
example to Jerome ( Epist 78.20), who speaks of it as the ‘little Genesis.
The form known to Jerome was probably the Greek translation, whose
date is unknown; this was also the form read by the eighth-century Byzan136
tine chroniclers Syncellus and Cedrenus.
This Greek version provided
the basis also for the Latin version, which was translated no later than the
sixth century ad, 137 but possibly as early as the mid-fifth century.

The following passage contains an explicit reference to India, and comes
it is already mentioned as being among Noah’s bequest to Shem

after

(8.21):

138

And Shem also divided his land among his sons; and the first share fell to Elam and
his sons — what lies east of the river Tigris till it reaches the east, the whole land of
India, and the Red Sea coast, and the waters of Dedan, and all the mountains of

Mebri and Ela, and all the land of Susa, and all that is on the side of Pharnak to
the Red Sea and the river Tina. (9.2)

The tripartite scheme of Genesis is in Jubilees matched with that of the
Ionian geography. This fact might go some way to explaining its resilience
for so many centuries during the Middle Ages.
We come next to Josephus, another author to interpret the Table of
Nations for his own purposes. Like Jubilees, Josephus begins by outlining the
territory of Shem,

Ham and Japheth before speaking of their descendants

(Ant. Iud. 1. 122— 147).

The composite text now known as I Enoch, ‘a thesaurus of early Jewish
lore on astronomy, meteorology, botany and geography’, dating to the late
first century ad,

makes no explicit reference to India. Yet the journeys of

Enoch, described in the section known as the Book of the Watchers, are
highly suggestive: on his tour of the east Enoch saw, among other things in
the desert, trees looking like those of frankincense and myrrh (29:2), and

1,6

Syncellus (ed. A. E. Mosshamer [Leipzig: Teubner, 1984])
to India explicitly.

makes only a few passing references
Chronographic tradition embraced several Indias, and Syncellus appears to

entertain both an Arabian and an Ethiopian ‘India’. This is hardly surprising in view of the early

Jewish tradition concerning Kush: Goldenberg, Curse ofHam, p. 211.
137
138

Some substantial fragments survive in a sixth-century MS containing also the Assumption of Moses.
It should be mentioned, as we think back on Isidore, that Eden is mentioned here in the same
breath (8.21).

236

Contexts ofa discourse

others fragrant like mastic and cinnamon (30:2-3). Various other trees are

mentioned, including the almond (31):

And after (experiencing) this fragrant odour, while looking toward the northeast
over the mountains, I saw seven mountains full of excellent nard, fragrant trees,

cinnamon trees, and pepper. (32:1) From there I went over the summits of the
mountains, far toward the east of the earth. I (then) passed over the Erythraean
Sea and went far from it, and passed over the head of angel Zutu’el. (32:2) And
I

came to the garden of righteousness and saw beyond those trees many (other)

large (ones) growing there - their fragrance sweet, large ones, with much elegance,

and glorious. And the tree of wisdom, of which one eats and knows great wisdom,
(was among them). (32:3) (tr. Charlesworth, Old Testament Pseudepigrapha,

50)

It will be noticed that the paradise of righteousness lies on the northeast edge

of the world, in the region of outer darkness beyond Ocean. The journeys
elsewhere in the book are, likewise, without explicit topographical referent

and yet highly suggestive of an exotic, even mystical location.
Josephus’ version of the Table of Nations (Ant. Iud. 1.122-47) also adds
topographical specificity to the Genesis text. His major concern in this is
to provide onomastic correspondences: thus, for example, Arphaxades gave
his name to the Arphaxadaeans, ‘who are called Chaldaeans today’. 139 The

sons of Shem rule ‘Asia as far as the Indian Ocean, starting at the Euphrates’
( I 43)-

He claims he has Hellenised the Hebrew names for the pleasure of

his readers; elsewhere he claims to have omitted names which might cause

offence by their non-Greek sound. 140

II. 2.

The eastern tradition ofCosmas Indicopleustes

Orosius and Isidore emerge from this analysis as nodal points in the history

of ideas, as key points of connection between antiquity on the one hand, in
its overlapping Judaeao-Christian

and Greco-Roman aspects, and medieval

Europe on the other. But we come now to an east Mediterranean author
who was also writing in a discernibly Judaeo-Christian tradition; who was
heir to much of the same material as Orosius and Isidore, but responded
in different ways, and certainly with different emphases. But whereas the
classical tradition in Orosius and Isidore is Roman, refracted by Pliny’s
Natural history that tradition in Cosmas is Greek: among Cosmas’ sources
,

139

tous vuv XocAScaous kocAouhevous (144): exotic place-names are ‘unscrambled’ through identification with better known localities.

40

1. 129, cf. 7*369; H-68, 152; 12.57. On this point we might compare Pliny’s
apologetic tone in mentioning the ‘strange names’ {barbarae appellationes) of foreign peoples, in this case of Hither Spain

(3.29); the north-east Adriatic coast produces ‘a few names of people that merit or allow repetition’

(populorum pauca ejfatu digna aut facilia nomina, 3.139).

Empire

237

are Ephorus and other classical writers, but these are far outweighed by
biblical texts.'

41

In keeping with Nestorian exegesis, Cosmas’ world was in the shape of

square building, representing Moses’ tabernacle of Genesis 10. He strives in
his work to refute both the astronomy of Claudius Ptolemy and contempo-

rary Christian Aristotelian thought, as represented by John Philoponus in

the Three Chapters controversy;'

42

in his arguments he favours literal accep-

tance of scripture, and quotes profusely from both Testaments throughout
the work. In particular, Cosmas attacks views about the sphericity of the
earth and the existence of Antipodes (esp. book 1). As much as Cosmas’

worldview differed from, say, Orosius’ or Isidore’s, all three share a debt to
Jewish cosmology.' 43

Thus, for example, when Cosmas in his second book offers his own to
Aristotelian and Ptolemaic geography we return to the by now familiar first
principles of Judaeo-Christian geography. From his exegesis of the Table of

Nations, the following section is relevant to the east:

The sons ofShem, Elam andAshur {Gen. 10:21), that is the Elamites and Assyrians
and remaining nations, and as many of these as were spread far and wide over Asia
and the East - the nations of the Persians, Huns, Baktrians, Indians, onwards to
the ocean. (2. 27) 144

The phrasing of the end of the extracts shows that the list of regions listed
is

not exclusive. Nonetheless, India marks the ends of the (inhabited) earth.
Yet Cosmas’ sources demonstrably include not only biblical but also

polytheist works.

Such is the nature of his sources, as we can now imply

them from his text, that he has been characterised by his most recent
editor as a kind of low- to middlebrow autodidact: such is his watereddown coverage of scientific topics.' 45 Book 12, which is not found in all the
manuscripts, stands out also in the extent of its similarity of content and
language to Hellenistic and early imperial texts such as those of Berossus,
Manetho and Josephus. 146 Any implications that might be drawn from this
141

Ephorus (2.79-80) and Hyperides (quoted at 5.26) are referred to in detail, whereas others such as

Homer (12.9) and Pytheas of Marseilles (2.80) are referred to only in a very general way.
142

Philoponus,

On creation 3.9 explicitly claims that Cosmas followed Theodore of Mopsuestia in

interpreting the scriptures.
143

See further M. V. Anastos, ‘The Alexandrian origin of the Christian Topography of Cosmas Indicopleustes’,

DOP

3

(1946), 73-80; Kunio Kitamura, ‘Cosmas Indicopleust£s et la figure de la terre’,

in Moist Geographer ed. Desreumaux and Schmidt, pp. 79—98.
144

uioi 8 e Iqn, EAcxla kcu ’Aaoup, touteotiv EAaiiiTas Kai ’Aauplous, Kai Ta Aoitra e6vt| Kai ocra
e£ cxutcov ETTE^ETdOTjaav egos ’Aalas Kai etti dvaToAfiv, FlEpacov, Ouvvcov, Bcncrpcov, ’IvBcov egos

tou "OOkeocvoO.
145

‘Cosmas repr£sente la science abitardie qui caracterise certains milieux chr£tiens et paiens de la fin
de l’antiquit£’ (Wolska, Topographie chretienne, p. 16).

146

Wolska, Topographie chretienne p. 57.
,

238

Contexts ofa discourse

about his intended audience must take into account that he aims the main
thrust of his attack at those Christians who have taken pagan beliefs on
board, and no doubt we must understand this group to encompass a wide

range of learning: not only the likes of John Philoponus but also those less
learned.

A

few words might be said about Cosmas’ conception of the world in
purely geographical terms. Paradise lies to the east: before the flood it was
inhabited by humans (2.78-79). He locates the river Phison of Genesis in
India, though refusing to choose between the Indus and the Ganges:

Of these [rivers originating in Paradise] the Phison is the India river, which some
call Indus or Ganges. It flows

down from regions in the interior, and flows by many

mouths into the Indian Sea. (2.81) 147
It is interesting to note that at this very point

Cosmas proceeds to compare
the Phison with the Nile; and then to describe the river Gihon as flowing
through Ethiopia. 148 This rapid code-switching vividly shows Cosmas’ multiple debts: to Greek learning, however indirectly gleaned, and to scripture.

As such, it may be regarded as one of the many, often conflicting attempts
of late-antique Christians to engender a new paideia that they could call
their own.

One of the main targets of Cosmas’ polemic is the notion of the
antipodes. This he attacks by ridiculing the idea that people walk upside
down. 149 In mentioning Taprobane, India and Ethiopia, together with their
flora and fauna and even to some extent their peoples, he comes to those
regions that are generally described as antipodean in the Hellenistic or

A

Plinian tradition of ethnography.
few humans are mentioned in these
accounts, e.g. 11.11. On no occasion do we encounter in Cosmas the monstrous races so familiar in the Plinian tradition. In
147

mentioning what he

6 MEV cp£iCTct>v ev -rrj 'IvSiK-rj X“P<?, ov KaAouaf tives 'Iv6ov f| rdyytiv, ek twv ptaoydcov ttou
KctTE PX°P EU °S> ttoAXoS EKpoias Eyo iv

to 'IvSikw TrsXdyEi.

It is characteristic of Cosmas Christian paideia that this
passage comes immediately after an
appeal to the authority of the pagan writers, Ephorus, Pytheas of Marseilles and

Xenophanes of
Colophon, who are cited because they supposedly accord with holy scripture (i.e. in supposedly
opposing the idea of the earths sphericity): rat TauTa ptv oi e(;co0ev ou|j(|>covoOvtes -rrj 0Eia

F pa<)>ij euploKovTai sip-praTes.
148

The roughly contemporary version of the Table of Nations, by the Byzantine chronicler John
Malalas, makes explicit mention of India: ‘The tribe of Shem took as the length of its

territory the

land from Persia and Bactria as far as India and, as for the breadth, as far as Rhinokourouroi,

that

from

the East as far as the region of the South, including Syria and Media and the river called
the
Euphrates’ 1.6 (ch. 10 Dindorf) tr. Jeffreys, Jeffreys and Scott (Melbourne: Australian Association
is,

for Byzantine Studies, 1986), p. 5.
145

The term ‘antipodes’ implies strict symmetry across the equatorial plain, a one-to-one correspondence of north and south, and is thus used by Eratosthenes; on the other hand ‘antichthones’
assumes asymmetry and dissymmetry.

Empire

239

has seen on his own travels, he is making India and Taprobane seem more
accessible to travellers from the Roman world. In the process he might

be emphasising that the subcontinent was ready to receive missionaries.
Despite the autobiographic element in the work, there is no hint of danger
in travelling to and in India.

150

Autobiography is indeed one of the unusual features of the Christian
topography

,

and one that deserves special consideration. Since so much

stigma was attached to the profession of trading, in the classical period

comes as something of a surprise that Cosmas so confidently
152
and
implicitly at several points when he speaks of his own travels. Not only do
we hear of Cosmas the trader but also of other traders, Roman and Persian;
at least,’

51

it

identifies himself as a trader. This he does explicitly at 2.54 and 56,

however, no Indian traders are explicitly mentioned. What is more, in
describing the natural historical details of book 11, he evaluates almost every

item against his own experience. Thus, for example, in discussing individual
animals in turn, he mentions that he has seen a giraffe, a rhinoceros (both

dead and alive). Of the hog-deer ( taurelaphos), he says bluntly, in a variation

on the theme of autopsy, that he has ‘both seen and eaten it’.’ 53 On the
other hand, he has not seen a unicorn; nor a hippopotamus, though he

has seen (and in fact sold) some of its large teeth (11.9). These two features

of first-person narration invite comparison with a work in which there is
no authority of books: Periplus ofthe Erythraean Sea, though of course the
earlier work lacks Cosmas’ insistent polemical edge.

There is more than one source of authority implicit within the Christian
topography, both his own experience of the present time, complete with
autopsy,’ 54 and that of the book - the book, one might say from Cosmas’
perspective, namely the Old and

New Testaments. While he does mention

Christian missions to the Indian subcontinent, he freely admits that they

150

The Periplus on the other hand has much to say about the practical dangers of travelling, e.g.,
ch. 20 on the Arabian Red Sea coastline and ch. 40 on the Indian. The dangers of travel, at the
hands of bandits, is acknowledged in Roman law as a possible cause of death, e.g., Digest 13.6.5.4:
Ray Laurence, ‘Afterword: travel and empire’, in Travel and geography in the Roman empire, ed.
Colin Adams and Ray Laurence (London: Routledge, 2001), pp. 167-76 at 172.

151

Andrea Giardina, ‘The merchant’, in The Romans, ed. Andrea Giardina, tr. Lydia G. Cochrane
(University of Chicago Press, 1993), pp. 245-71; and cf. Chapter 4, section II above.
He identifies himself as a business traveller when referring to his companion as aAAov eva irpay-

152

naTEUTpv (2.56). Note also the use of the first person in the description of Adulis: ev0a Kai tt)v
EUTTOpiav noiouiJeOcx ol caro ’AAE^avSpEias Kai onto TAa enTTopEuopievoi (2.54).
153

154

tov 8e xoipsAa<!>ov Kai eT5ov Kai E<j>ayov.
By the same token there is a vivid sense of place, namely Alexandria, as Cosmas’ base. This is
clearest in the first prologue to the work; when he says that he has sold hippopotamus’ teeth ‘here’
(EVTaOfia), we may well understand him to mean Alexandria.

240

Contexts ofa discourse

have not been entirely successful. This seems to be a function of his commercial perspective, which is based on a close-up view of the subcontinent
and its social relations.

The animals he describes and draws owe something to the marvel tramuch closer than Pliny’s Natural history to identifiable
non-mythical animals. Thus the first chapters of book n are devoted to

dition, but are

a variety of Indian fauna and flora: the rhinoceros, buffalo
giraffe (kamelopardalis)

,

(

taurelaphos),

wild cattle ( agriobous), musk ( moskhos), unicorn

{monokeros), wild boar ( khoirelaphos),

hippopotamus (all 11.1-9); pepper

and coconut {piperea and karua indika, 10.10); the seal, dolphin and tur{phoke delphinos and khelone). These animals may be unusual from
Mediterranean perspective, but they are not completely outlandish in

tle

a

,

the way that invokes, say, Ctesias’ mantichores. 155

On

the other hand, the
description of humans owes nothing to the marvel tradition: where they
are mentioned it is with no sense of the "marvellous people’ but

with some

attention to social organisation. The story of the merchant Sopatrus reflects
well on the king of Taprobane, for he is able to distinguish the equitably

minted Roman coins from the dishonest Persian ones.' 56 The story implies
an openness and accessibility of that land, and conversely its intelligibility
to the Roman world. Most importantly, there is an awareness of
Christian
missionary activity. That activity may not always be successful, by Cosmas’
own admission, but it is nonetheless in evidence. Taprobane has a church,

clergy and its band of the faithful;
but Cosmas is unsure whether the
same can be said for regions beyond it. Given the humanising description
157

of the local inhabitants, it thus seems that Cosmas’ description of the subcontinent is imbued with the implicit idea of Christian mission. If this is
true, it would not be surprising that Cosmas describes Taprobane

in terms

that emphasise its comprehensibility over its strangeness.

III.

THE RHETORICAL BACKGROUND: IMPERIAL PANEGYRIC

The discussion above has illustrated two related phenomena: geographical
generalisation by which a mental category of ‘the east’ is created; and the
false consciousness of imperial rhetoric in which empire is
presented as
coterminous with the edges of the earth. In seeking to understand the link

It is

5

157

telling that the least realistically imaginable animal described

gets the careful comment that

Cosmas has not seen a specimen: the povoKEpcos, which we might translate as unicorn.
19. In a detailed study of this episode, F. F. Schwarz presents Sopatrus
as Cosmas’ source:
‘Kosmas und Sielediba’, Ziva Antika 25 (1975), 469—90.
£KKAr|(Jia, xAripiKoi, ttiotoi, 3.65.

:

241

Empire

between these, we should turn to the extravagances of imperial panegyric.
In particular, the ‘amplifications’ described by Menander Rhetor give a
compelling reason for the resulting vagueness about the (eastern) edges of
the earth.

158

The principle can be illustrated with regard to India from a considerable
range of panegyrics. Thus the anonymous panegyric of 297/8 mentions fear
inspired by the emperor Constantius I among Aethiopians and Indians
May the Nile trophies under which the Ethiopian and the Indian trembled pardon
me. May the recent destruction of the Carpi likewise be satisfied with a mention
of its glory. (8(5]. 5.2)

159

The speech in fact celebrates Constantius’ victory over the Britons in 297.
Though India is the farthest point from Britain, it may have special relevance here in view of his keenness to imitate Alexander.

160

At Trier in 310 the anonymous panegyrist had this to say in honour of
Constantine:
Beneficent gods, why is it that new divinities, destined to be worshipped the whole
world over, always come from some very remote part of the earth? Thus Mercury
from the river Nile, whose source is unknown, and Liber [Bacchus] from the land
of the Indians, who are nearly privy to the sunrise, have shown themselves to

mankind as gods manifest. (6(7] .9.4)

161

The panegyrist goes on to claim, by way of an answer to his question here
posed, that regions adjoining heaven are holier than Mediterranean ones;
where the land
‘it is closer for an emperor to be sent by the gods from
ends’.

158

162

au^pCTEis, 368.22.

On this kind of phenomenon, called amplificatio in Latin, see Marincola, Authority

and tradition pp. 35-7, as applied to the histories of individual rulers.
,

159

dent ueniam trophaea Niliaca sub quihus Aethiops et Indus intremuit. contenta sit uoce gbriae suae
etiam proxima ilia ruina Carporum.
University
C. E. V. Nixon and Barbara Saylor Rodgers, In praise oflater Roman emperors (Berkeley:

of California Press, 1996), pp. 115-16 ad loc., discuss the question of what this might mean: if the ‘Nile
Aithiopian
trophies’ indeed refer to the suppression of the revolt in Busiris and Coptos, then the
and Indian’ may denote the peoples of southern Egypt. Even if this is so, it does not diminish the
evocative force of ‘Indian’ as an expression of the broad spread of imperial power.
160
161

Lane Fox, ‘Itinerary of Alexander’.
numina uniuerso orbi
di boni, quod hoc est quod semper ex aliquo supremo fine mundi noua deum
prope consciis
colenda descendant? sic Mercurius a Nilo, cuius fluminis origo nescitur, sic Liber ab Indis
solis orientis deos se gentibus ostendere praesentes.

For an analysis of geographical space in the panegyrics, and of this passage in particular, see Nicola
Baglivi, ‘Osservazioni su paneg. \hl(6).9’, Orpheus n.s. 7 (1986), 329—37, esp. 332.
162

imperator ubi
Sacratiora sunt profecto mediterraneis loca uicina caelo, et inde propius a dis mittitur
matched by 10(2). 2.1,
terra finitur. The phrase describing India as ‘almost privy to the sunrise is

where the western side of the Ocean, near the river Ebro, is conscio occidui solis (‘witness of the

24 2

Contexts ofa discourse

Later, when Pacatus addresses Theodosius in 389, we sense some slippage

between the descriptive and the normative: the question of just how far

Roman power has spread is complicated by the supposed extent of the
emperor’s own fame.
For your guidance, Emperor, has frightened not only those peoples divided from
our world by swathes of forest or rivers or mountains, but those which Nature has
separated, made inaccessible by perpetual heat, set apart by unending winter, or

cut
off by intervening seas. The Indian is not protected by Ocean, nor the man from

Bosphorus by the cold, nor the Arab by the equatorial sun. Your power reaches
163
places that the name of Rome had hardly reached before. (2(12].
22.2)

Despite their enormous distance, these peoples have heard the name of
Rome, and live under the immediate shadow of its political might. Even
Roman power has not reached India and other distant corners in the

if

formal sense of governance, the emperor

is

known and feared there.

In this case, India stands for areas under Roman influence though not
administrative control, and this respect reflects on the emperor’s personal

charisma.

When Hercules and Dionysus are invoked by way of comparison/ 64 the
emperor’s wide geographic range is graphically illustrated. Artists can forget
their depictions

of those gods’ triumphs, says Pacatus, for his panegyric

provides sufficient material for artists and historians/ 65

whom favourable fate has granted the power to give fame to events, you
too should despise those cliched themes of ancient tales, the labours of Hercules

Artists, to

and the Indian triumphs of Bacchus, and the wars with snake-footed monsters.
( 2 [i 2 ].

44 5)

166

.

To see the phenomenon of generalising about India within the rhetorical
tradition, we must turn to the treatises attributed to Menander Rhetor, to
setting sun’). Again a god’s wide geographical range provides the material for

praising an emperor,

and in this case Hercules is invoked in honour of Maximian.
163

tua enim, Impemtor, auspicia non hae tantum gentes tremunt quas ab orbe nostro siluarum

interualla
uel flumina montesue distinguunt, sed quas aeternis ardoribus inaccessas aut continua
hieme separatas aut interfusis aequoribus abiunctas Natura disterminat.

non Oceano Indus, non frigore Bospho-

non Arabs medio sole securus est; quo uix peruenerat nomen ante Romanum, accedit imperium.
This passage is discussed by Asche, Weltherrschaftsidee pp. n-i8.
Elsewhere the labours of Hercules are celebrated, and at 10(2) .4.2-4 Pacatus develops the
double
comparison of ‘divine’ assistance, suggesting that Maximian is to Diocletian as Hercules is to
ranus,

,

164

Jove.

In fact, Hercules recurs in monuments and coins of the Tetrarchic period, often in
connection with
the gigantomachy. Dionysus Indian conquest was also open to explicitly negative
interpretation,
as something morally degenerate: Prudent. C.

3

Symm. 122-8.
For an historical evaluation of panegyric, Sabine MacCormack, ‘Latin prose panegyrics’, in
Empire
and aftermath Silver Latin ed. T. A. Dorey (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1975), vol. II,
pp. 143—205, and MacCormack, Art and ceremony pp. 1—14.
:

,

,

166

uos quoque quibus secunda sors cessit dare famam rebus artifices, uulgata ilia ueterum
fabularum
argumenta despicite, Herculeos labores et Indicos Liberi triumphos et anguipedum bella monstrorum.
,

Empire

243

the sections devoted to the epibaterios logos, or speech on arrival (387.17—28).

The author speaks of thesis or praising the ‘position’ of a country:
our fathers did not rule over a small area like the Peloponnese, but reigned over
Lydia and then subdued Caria and proceeded to conquer all the east; Egyptians,
Blemmyes and the tribes of the Erembi claimed they were our subjects - they who
in recent times appear to have been obedient to us, in the alliances and assemblies,
(ref.

in Menander Rhet .)‘

67

168
But, for our
There are textual problems in and around this passage.
purposes, there is no mistaking a central point: the ends of the earth could
be used in praising a ruler with whom it might be associated, at whatever
stretch of the imagination. In the passage quoted it should be noted that
Menander moves between particular lands (such as Lydia, Caria and Egypt)

and a generalising idea of ‘the entire east’: Tqv ecotav cnracrav (387.24). In
69
we can safely assume that ‘the east’ here is the
the context of the work/
eastern Mediterranean.

Among his plentiful verbal conjurings, the panegyrist here exhibits a
special sleight

of hand, which might be analysed as follows in a slow-

motion replay: in former times the father of the ruler conquered various
‘eastern people’ (an implicit vagueness here being important); those eastern

people have sent ambassadors to the ruler in the present; therefore we in the
present have dominion over people from the east. This paraphrase is clearly
exaggerated, but an important principle emerges here. While we should

bear in mind that the panegyrics are very much rooted in the occasion of
their initial delivery/

we have seen a theme that is common to a range

70

of them: of a generalised east, and of India specifically, bringing glory
to the emperor, whether by virtue of the supposed extent of his rule, or

by comparison with the ever-recurrent Hercules and Dionysus. This we
may regard as an important link, chronologically at the very least, between
the Roman Empire of Augustus and Trajan and that of Constantine and

Theodosius.

167

oi iraTEpes f^pcov i*jp£av

.

.

.

ou8e TtEpiyEypappEvcov tottcov, KaOcarEp f) nEAoirovvriCTOs, aAA’

fjp^av pev Au8ias, ETrf|p£av 5 e Kaplas, Kai TTpofiAQov tt^v Icbiav atraaav kcct aor p£<f>o p£ vo i,
Kai cbpoAoyTiCTav f^piv SouAeueiv Alyutrnoi Kai BAeppues Kai ’EpEpp&v yEVT), eittep auToi Kai
ev toIs teAeutouois xpo voi S (|>cavovTai Ottokouovtes fjpiv ev tocis (juppayiais Kai KAfiasaiv.
168

See D. A. Russell and N. G. Wilson (eds.), Menander Rhetor (Oxford: Clarendon, 1981), pp. 291-3

ad loc.
169

On the authorship of the work(s) attributed to Menander Rhetor, as well as their social milieu, see
Russell and Wilson, Menander pp. xi-xii.
,

170

MacCormack, ‘Latin prose panegyrics’, p. 151. In this regard Robin Seager, ‘Some imperial virtues in
the Latin prose panegyrics: the demands of propaganda and the dynamics of literary composition
PLLS 4 (1983), 129-66, leaves little room to perceive differences between the panegyrics, useful as
,

the article may be as a descriptive catalogue of topoi.

:

Contexts ofa discourse

244

IV.

ORBIS TERRARUM URBI SPECTANDUS THE MECHANICS
OF REPRESENTATION

We have already seen wordplay on urbs/orbis by Ovid and others: now
the same pun used by Pliny in discussing Agrippa’s map (3.17) alerts us
of reception. 171 The central question for us to consider in

to the issue

this final section of the chapter is by what means India was represented.

Given the centrality of maps in modern conceptions of space, it is tempting to retroject the visual element onto Greco-Roman antiquity, but it
is not clear that this is justified. What is more, we are faced with real
questions about the reconstruction of Augustan ‘maps’: any attempt to
reconstruct them, as in the case of Bunbury,

must rely on a combina-

tion of literary evidence and on retrojection from later medieval maps. In
contrast to earlier studies, Kai Brodersen has recently argued for the pre-

dominance of written over visual representations of space in the Roman
empire. By this reckoning, even when images do exist, they tend to be
less important afterthoughts, serving more of a decorative than a utilitar-

ian function. 172 Of greater practical utility, and indeed significance, were
itineraries, which

more closely reflect actual routes, and make it possible

for others to replicate particular journeys. Inscriptions play a vital role

here. 173

Such a view is a useful corrective to the work of earlier scholars,

who assumed similarities between ancient and contemporary uses and categories of maps. Yet it may be overstated: Brodersen’s definition of scale,
a key component for a map as opposed to a cartogram, seems needlessly
stringent, with the result that no candidate for a Roman scale-map can pass
muster. 174
171

For the pun, see section 1 2 above. In the case of Pliny the reading is in some doubt, it must be
.

admitted, since urbi was printed by old editions up to Harduin’s Paris edition of 1685; Detlefsen,

followed by Jan-Mayhoff, preferred the rather flat reading, orbi. The conjecture does however
receive the blessing of the TLL , which adduces 3.67 from the same book of the

HN as a comparable

case of paronomasia (vol. IX-2.9t6.24).
172

Brodersen, Terra cognita

,

cf.

Bunbury, History ofancient geography, and now Carey, Pliny's catalogue,

pp. 61-74, tracing links between Pliny’s text and Augustan monuments.
175

Janni, Mappa, is fundamental in its emphasis on itineraries, an approach recently reaffirmed by

C. R. Whittaker, 'Mental maps and frontiers: seeing like a Roman’, reprinted in his Rome and
pp. 63-87 (orig. 2002). Against this, R. J. A. Talbert has argued for the importance
of provinces as units: ‘Rome’s provinces as framework for world-view’, in Roman rule and civic
its frontiers,

regional perspectives (first to fourth centuries ad) ed. L.de Ligt, A. Hemelrijk and H. W. Singor
(Amsterdam: Gieben, 2004), pp. 21-37. See also Benet Salway, ‘Travel, itineraria and tabellaria’, in

life:

Travel and geography, ed. Adams and Laurence (2001), pp. 22-66.
174

Brodersen, ‘The presentation of geographical knowledge for travel and transport in the Roman
world: itineraria non tantum adnotata sed etiam picta', in Travel and geography, ed. Adams and

Laurence (2001), pp. 7-21; and his ‘Neue Entdeckungen zu antiken Karten’, Gymnasium 108 (2001),
137-48.

,

,

Empire

2-45

One reason this question has not been easy to resolve is the elusive nature
of the ‘map’ of Agrippa, by any account a key instance of map-mindedness
in Augustan Rome. One reason this question has been difficult to adjudicate
is that the

term ‘map’ has been made to bear too much weight, combining
symbolism. In the practice of Romans, the variety of terms

utility with

used suggests a variety of ways in which space could be represented, and
a variety of uses for those representations. It is therefore with due caution

about undue assumptions about ancient ‘maps’ that we should proceed to
consider some of the visual means by which India was represented.

An obvious place to start is the extensive Geography of Claudius Ptolemy,
which has with justification been viewed as the culmination of the Greek
scientific-mathematical tradition of cartography. The Geography may be

regarded as a ‘how-to’

text,

intended to inform those wishing to make

their own maps of particular areas. It is unclear whether or not the work
itself included its

own diagrams. 175 The relevance of Cosmas’ Christian

topography is puzzling on this very question: that text itself makes reference to illustrations, and these have been reconstructed on the basis
176

It is unclear
of three manuscripts of the ninth to eleventh centuries.
to what extent Ptolemy’s text can be compared to Cosmas’ in this

respect.

The issue of Roman map-mindedness now gains intriguing if frustrating
new evidence in the form of a papyrus from Antaiopolis in Upper Egypt
and dated to the first century bc.‘ 77 Its drawn map, sharing the papyrus
with a geographic text of Artemidorus of Ephesus (fl. ioo bc) and various
sketches of animals, might constitute a precedent for the Peutinger map,
particularly if its zig-zag lines represent routes. This possibility remains

somewhat speculative, given that the map on the papyrus (thus far inaccessible and not yet fully published) seems to be incomplete. Nonetheless,
the implications of the map for the present study are considerable since

Artemidorus’ geographical work is known to have covered not only Spain

but the farthest extreme, Taprobane (e.g., Plin.

175

HN 7.30).

178

O. A. W. Dilke, ‘The culmination of Greek cartography in Ptolemy’ in History of cartography
ed. Harley and Woodward, vol. I, pp. 189-90. For bibliography on this question, see Dilke, Greek
and Roman maps (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1985), p. 207 n. 28, updated by Stuckelberger,
,

‘Ptolemy’.
176
177

Huber, Heilige Berge, pp. 109-12.
C. Gallazzi and B. Kramer, ‘Artemidor im ZeichensaaT Archiv fur Papyrusforschung 44 (1998), 189208, and B. Kramer, ‘The earliest known map of Spain (?) and the geography of Artemidorus of
,

178

Ephesus on papyrus’, Imago Mundi 53 (2001), 115-20.
Bunbury, History ofancient geography, pp. 61—8; Weerakkody, Taprobane pp. 223—4; Geus, Eratosthenes, pp. 286-7.

246

Contexts ofa discourse

Of the visual representations presented in Chapter 3 above, two different
kinds point to an imperial context: scenes of the triumph of Dionysus, on
the Baltimore sarcophagus; and the late-antique personifications of India
of the Piazza Armerina mosaic and the silver plate. The personifications

aligned India with provinces ruled by the Romans, even though India never

came close to political subjection to Rome. The provincial paradigm for
representing India (Chapter 3, section II. 2 above) needs emphasis here for
its

obvious imperial framework.

On what scale of geographical conception did India feature in Roman
A tripartite scheme is usefully outlined by Brodersen, and let us

thinking?

briefly apply it to India:

surveying.

world maps, regional itineraria and local land-

Of these, there can be no doubt that India registered on the

largest of these scales, as we saw in connection with the Greek scientific tra-

dition of geography in Chapter 1 above.

On the smallest scale, we have no

evidence for cadastral surveys of the subcontinent conducted by Romans in
the way they were conducted for settlements of the Mediterranean world. 179

On the other hand, it is less clear whether India fitted into the mid-scale
of geography. Strabo’s Geography and Pliny’s Natural history even more so
exhibit a confluence of different kinds of topographic information,

and

resist simplifying attempts to pigeon-hole them. To take another key wit-

ness, the Peutinger map allows no easy assumptions about military use. l8 °

We might assume a priori that a map of such a scale was useful in a military context; yet military establishments such as forts account for less of

the actual place-markings in India than they do to its west. Such practical

considerations may well be subordinated to the overall impression created

by public display. Recent scholarship has pointed to the complexity and
sophistication of the map, and we might aptly see in it the combining of

various kinds of topographic information.

A striking feature of India in

the Peutinger map is its profusion of roads, some along the coast, all of

which suggest much more land travel than the Periplus would lead us to
expect.

We can hardly imagine that these are Roman-built roads; yet they

are presented within the symbolic frame of universal Roman power. 181 The

Indian roads, complete with distances, and the temple of Augustus close to
Muziris are a means of naturalising the subcontinent as part of the extended

Mediterranean world, and thus by implication subject to Roman power.

179

Brian Campbell, The writings of the Roman Land surveyors: introduction, text, translation and com-

mentary to the Agrimensores (London: Society for the Promotion of Roman Studies, 2000).
180
181

Talbert, ‘Cartography and taste’, 127-8.
Ibid., 131; cf. Whittaker, Rome and its frontiers, p. 126.

Empire
V.

247

CONCLUSION

That governance should be the first criterion by which to characterise the
Roman empire cannot be questioned. 182 But much would be lost if we
failed to consider the more subjective senses that constitute ‘mental maps’.

By such a definition, it would not be extravagant to claim that India was
in fact part of the Roman empire. By the same token, ‘imperialism’ has
been discussed here in a restrictive sense of the perceived limits of empire,
and the propaganda constructing India as a region that could and would
be conquered. Strictly speaking, it was of course a false consciousness that
allowed Augustan poets to claim or imply that India was in fact already part

of the Roman empire;

183

by the same token, several histories of Alexander,

exaggerated the easternmost point reached by him — for Diodorus, the

Ganges, and for the romance tradition, the eastern edge of the world itself.
The origin of this misapprehension may be traced back to Alexander’s own
manipulation of myth, and the continuing appeal he held for later leaders of
the late Republic and empire. For the later period, there is also a tendency to

view Hellenism, what might now be thought of as the diffusion of culture,
in political terms: hence the exaggerations about Alexander’s geographical
turning point may be seen as a kind of political-military encoding of the
cultural realities of the Indo-Greek empires.

Comparison of this chapter with the previous one highlights some distinguishing criteria between different kinds of geographical information,

namely those from the commercial and the military spheres. Information
linked explicitly with imperial conquest had a certain cachet attached to it,
particularly in so far as it invoked the memory of Alexander’s conquests.
The converse of this holds too, namely that information linked with com-

mercial enterprise has distinctly less prestige, as Strabo openly says at one

point (15.1.4 C686, cf. Chapter 4, section

V above). But this distinction

is

not absolute, for even Strabo, in dismissing the traders as unreliable witnesses, acknowledges that they are indeed sources; there is every chance that,
unheralded, information linked with commercial enterprises is embedded

within Strabo’s and Pliny’s texts. Ptolemy’s Geography, is on the other hand,
explicit that merchants, who are in fact named, were sources for Marinus

account of India, and by implication for his own.
In general, there are two major senses in which an imperial context of

geographical information can be identified. First, it is undeniable that the
181

Among such studies note esp. Millar et aL, Roman empire Andrew Lintott, Imperium Romanum:
;

politics and administration (London: Routledge, 1993); and Nicolet,
183

World of the citizen.

India was among the uictaelongo ordinegentes mentioned in the Shield ofAeneas (Verg.Aen. 8.722).

248

Contexts ofa discourse

military and administrative realities of the Roman empire went some way

towards stimulating the tremendous surge of interest in, and engagement
with issues of spatial distance evidenced in the Augustan age and early
empire. Not all such journeys made an impression on literary Indography.

To take a later example, we hear of one Aurelius Gaius (d. ad 299), whose
considerable travels while on military service included India, which is mentioned on his funerary inscription after Palestine, Egypt and Alexandria. 184
Secondly, maps and related texts made possible the symbolic expression
of imperial power,
himself.

It is

many of those expressions centring on the emperor

in this second, imaginative sphere rather than in the first

that we see the significance of India in the Roman discourse of empire.
The persistence of references to Alexanders expedition, often in distorted

and popular versions, historiograph ically far inferior to Arrian in accuracy
and detail, goes some way towards underlining the extent to which India
could indeed mark the ends of the world. In this way, India represented
the ultimate goal of military achievement. It is no accident that universal history and large-scale geographical writing flourishes in

age.

the Augustan

185

India as a marker of empire is something that needs to be taken seriously:

though India shares with other ‘eastern’ nations (e.g., Egypt, Arabia and
Mesopotamia) features such as antiquity and specialised priesthoods, it is
distinct from them in that it marks the edges of the earth. It was Alexander’s

expedition that secured for India an imperial context, even if that was

much more symbolic than administrative, a cognitive rather than a political
geography. In considering Christian empire, we are dealing with some of
the same features, but in a different context. In the coalescing of Jewish
and Greco-Roman traditions of geography, India retained a place in the
tripartite scheme, marking the extreme eastern edges.

Though Alexander was never to colonise it, India marked the end of his
empire: for the emperor Trajan, notably, it was a good to think with. This
chapter, like the first, gives the impression that whenever Alexander was

spoken about, India was never far from the mind of the person speaking.
If there is a vagueness about the exact location of India, that is because it
was probably not possible and certainly not easy to delimit a world empire
conceptually. This we might regard as a paradox in

its

own right. It is

184

Thomas Drew-Bear, ‘Les voyages d’Aurilius Gaius, soldat de Dioclecien’, in La Geographic administrative et politique d’Alexandre a Mahomet (Strasbourg: Centre de recherche,
1981), pp. 93—141; cf.

185

W. Schmitthenner, ‘Rome and India: aspects of universal history during the Principate’, JRS 69
( I 979)> 9 °-i ° 6; Franz Ferdinand Schwarz, ‘Magna India Pliniana’, WS (1995), 439-65.

lAnnee epigraphique 1981.777.

Empire

2 49

certainly easier to locate ‘Roman’ India on mental maps rather than with

the mathematically precise co-ordinates of Claudius Ptolemy.

To judge from accounts of Alexander’s expedition itself, it seems that the
issue of the ends of the earth became deeply imbued with that of military

conquest. The same issue would arise in different ways later. But, in so far
as Alexander was central to the self- fashioning of

Roman strong men of the

late Republic and the empire, it was impossible to consider the extent of

the empire without considering India. It was India, more than anything,
that could remind Romans that ‘Rome’ had expanded from agricultural
village to world empire.

In a recent article, Erich

Gruen has injected a note of scepticism on

the actual extent of imitatio Alexandri. He suggests, persuasively, that the

evidence on this has been exaggerated and too readily generalised; and

he emphasises the ways in which Alexander was a model to be avoided,
for his pothos and excessive behaviour.

This is without doubt a valuable

note of caution. But two objections may be raised, and both have important implications for this chapter. First, Gruen’s chronological span goes

up to Augustus and does not consider emperors such as Trajan or Cara186
calla
This later, more autocratic era of Roman history, provides ample
and perhaps less problematic evidence that some leaders did use the more
.

appealing side of Alexander in order to assert proximity to an ideal type.
Secondly, it would seem inappropriate to expect imitation of Alexander to

be available only as a package deal of imperial self-presentation, as Gruen

seems to imply: rather, Alexander provided a set of symbols which offered a

wide variety of uses, less an ultimate and abiding meaning than a tenacious
adaptability. It may be significant that India is not mentioned in the article, for any emphasis given to it might have produced a different picture.

Writers mentioning India as a place conquered or to be conquered tend
to imply the desirability of world conquest, and hence the positive sides

of Alexander’s image. It would be hard to imagine Trajan’s later reputation
as

optimus princeps without his conscious manipulation of the Alexander

image.

Authors and especially poets of the Augustan period tended to give
the impression that the borders of the empire coincided with the ends of
the earth. The hyperbolic language of poetry allowed this false consciousness to be easily maintained. The Res gestae and later imperial panegyric
in their own ways illustrate the centrality of such hyperbole to imperial

186

This in itself is not decisive, given the largely negative image of him among philosophers of the
empire: Stoneman, ‘Legacy of Alexander’. On Caracalla, cf. Chapter 4, section III. 2.

250

Contexts ofa discourse

self-presentation. It must be stressed that this operates at the level of rhetoric

and propaganda, without carrying any connotations about actual military
strategy. Indeed, India may be regarded as a good test-case which proves

the slippage between propaganda and policy. Much the same scenario can

be detected when Christians appropriate the Augustan language of world

conquest in the fourth century, following the conversion of Constantine.
In both cases, talk about India suggests the interwoven possibilities that

India has been conquered and that it can be conquered.

The resilience of this paradigm, solidly crystallised by Isidore, is tellingly
shown by the Hereford map and other world maps of the late Middle
Ages: it was a paradigm that was to last till the momentous coincidences

of the early modern period. It was only with the introduction in the west
of Ptolemy’s map, and later with the voyages of discovery, that the old

paradigm for perceiving the world eventually gave way to something substantially different.

To end this chapter, let us return to the five-century gap between Socrates
and Pliny with which it began. Whatever else had happened in between,
worthy of recounting in universal histories, two facts must be regarded as
central to thoughts about India: first, Alexander had visited the ends of the
earth; secondly, Rome had expanded into a world empire. In this chapter I

have attempted to show how these two elements are related, for Alexander
gave Romans, and indeed the western Middle Ages, eminently reusable

ways of thinking about that expansion.

CHAPTER 6
Wisdom,
1

I.

WRITING WISDOM

Holiness is one of the main spheres to be considered in any survey of Greek

and Roman ideas about India. Closely related and, as we shall see, just as
By way of a working deficulturally specific, is the concept of wisdom
.

nition, we may posit that Indian wisdom (typically of wisdom in general)
is

a kind of mystified knowledge

1
;

this mystification is central to the con-

cept of the holiness of certain Indians.

We shall have to consider how, if

at all, the distance implicit in specifically Indian sages

is

an extension of

the separation that in so many instances marks off the sacred as such

3
.

To

be sure, the Indian sages identified as Brahmans and Gymnosophists made
a major impression on the Alexander historians, and for a long time were
considered the bearers of Indian holiness. Indeed, as we saw in Chapter i,
Alexander’s encounter with them is a feature of all the major witnesses of
his expedition. Such an assertion is supported by the considerable degree of

overlap in the Alexander historians, and also the Alexander romance tradition. From that time onward the Brahmans were to become an important

feature of Greco-Roman Indography.

Now the Brahmans do not appear to

have featured in accounts predating Alexander, if we are to judge from the
apparent silence of Herodotus and Ctesias. This chapter therefore proceeds

from a conclusion reached in Chapter i: that Greeks became aware of Indians before they developed an interest in Indian wisdom. This provides an
instructive contrast with, say, Jews or Babylonians in Greek perceptions,
1

It is

no accident that both the religious and philosophical sides of Greco-Roman Indography are

taken into account in the standard collection of texts discussed here: Bernhard Bteloer and Franz
1

Bomer (eds.), Fontes Historiae Religionum Indicarum (Bonn: Rohrscheid, 1939).
The connection between wisdom and knowledge is unproblematic if one considers, for example,
Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta 1.216. More difficult is the question of what kind of knowledge is at
stake: see G. B. Kerferd, ‘What does the wise man know?’ in The Stoics ed. John M. Rist (Berkeley:
,

University of California Press, 1978), pp. 125-36.
3

Mary Douglas, Purity and danger: an analysis of the concept ofpollution and taboo rev. edn (London:
,

Routledge, 2002), e.g. pp. 8, n.

251

Contexts ofa discourse

252

cases in which the wisdom

of a foreign society was among the first and

most enduring part of its ethnographic image.
In this chapter we shall seek out the Indian sages amongst various kinds

of Greek and Latin texts, measuring them up, where appropriate, against
the picture to emerge from other (Sanskrit and Chinese) sources. If we are
to understand them as bearers of holiness, we must compare them with

other holy people, such as Magi, Chaldaeans and Druids. The history of

Alexanders expedition is central here, not only among the authors mentioned above, but also in alternative traditions, including the brief text On
the life of the Brahmans linked with the Alexander romance. Such texts in
the ‘popular’ Alexander tradition present Alexander as a scholar, eager for
knowledge about the curiosities of the strange world he encounters, or even
as a pilgrim, seeking out the Indian sages once he finds out about them
and then reverencing them. A more obvious kind of pilgrim is Apollonius,
whose travels to India are described in Philostratus’ hagiography of him.
Apart from the Brahmans, another part of Indian religion to be noticed
by Greeks and Romans was Buddhism. It is not until Clement of Alexandria
(Stromateis 1.305)

in the late second or early third century that Buddhism

is explicitly mentioned in a Greek text. 4 Clement speaks of the Buddha
merely as one revered for his piety. For Jerome, the Buddha was the founder
(princeps)

of the Gymnosophists; he was borne from the side of his mother,

who was a virgin:
Among the Gymnosophists of India, as it were through adherents of this folly, the
view is handed down that a virgin gave birth to the Buddha, the originator of their
sect, out of her side. This is nothing unusual for barbarians,

when the Greeks in
their learning suppose that Minerva was born from Jupiter’s head and Father
Bacchus from his father’s thigh. ( Against Jovinianus 1.42) 5

all

Jeromes concern with virginity in the treatise as a whole goes some way
towards explaining the Buddha’s supposed virgin birth, a detail which is not
otherwise attested. In fact, Jerome soon goes on to talk about the marital
piety of Indian women, as expressed in sati (1.44). However, the birth from
4

It is possible, however, that the term

lappavat refers to Buddhists: Grigorij M. Bongard-Levin and

Sergei Karpyuk, ‘Nachrichten iiber den Buddhismus in der antiken und friihchristlichen Literatur’,
in Hellenismus , ed. Betnd Funck (Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1996),

pp. 701-12. Predating Greek and
Latin literary references to Buddhism, a Kushan coin of around ad ioo presents a standing Buddha

and the Greek legend BOAAO: see further Errington and Cribb, Crossroads pp. 46-8, with Millar,
,

‘Looking east’, 519.
*

apudgymnosophistas Indiae quasi per manus huius opinionis auctoritas traditur, quodBuddham principem
dogmatis eorum a latere suo uirgo generarit. nec hoc mirum de barharis, cum Mineruam quoque de capite
Iouis et Liberum Patrem de femore eius procreatos doctissima finxerit Graecia.

A. Dihle, analysing this passage, suggests that Jeromes source was Egyptian, perhaps Clement
himself: ‘Buddha und Hieronymus’, in Antike und Orient pp. 98—101.
,

Wisdom

253

his mother’s side does tally with Buddhist scriptures. Here, Jerome’s explicit

comparison with Dionysus is a matter of presenting two different kinds of
foreigners, both the ‘most learned’ Greeks and Indians: in the process a
kind of consensus barbarorum is presented. Given that the life of Gautama
Buddha, the earliest historical figure in Indian history, dates back to the
fifth century bc ,

6

this represents a remarkable time-lag, one that deserves

consideration in its own right. In this passage, India and Greece are on
the opposite ends of the scale between learning and its opposite (which is

harder to label: a special kind of barbaries). Something to consider in this
chapter is the extent to which learning, paideia or doctrina, was a criterion

with which to evaluate Indian sages.

A major theme examined here

is that

of India as a destination of religious

travel. In fact, the varying role of travel as a phenomenon in all of this will

demand our attention. The travellers mentioned above came from the
west; others would come from the east. Towards the end of the period
covered here, we do know of one Fa-Hsien, 7 a Chinese pilgrim who visited
India’s Buddhist sites during the years ad 399-414. In their different ways
these descriptions reflect India’s status as a site of spirituality.

8

This chapter

must also set the scene for an account of another kind of religious travel,
namely Christian missionary activity. This will involve, however cursorily,
the figures of the apostle Thomas and Pantaenus, separated by almost two
centuries. For all their differences in motive and circumstance, all these
instances reflect the journeys of specific individuals, and the very fact of
individuality is worth noting.
It is

therefore important to consider consultation with the Brahmans

bound-

as a

kind of traffic in wisdom, a

aries.

Arnaldo Momigliano’s landmark study, Alien wisdom 9 continues

traffic

that crossed cultural
,

6

On the dating of the historical Buddha see, e.g., Hermann Kulke and Dietmar Rothermund, A history

7

ofIndia, 3rd edn (London: Routledge, 1998), p. 52.
Also known in Roman transliteration as Fa Hian or Fa Hien or Fa Xian. Among the various translations
available see Fa-Hsien, A record ofBuddhistic kingdoms: being an account by the Chinese monk Fa-Hien
ofhis travels in India and Ceylon (ad 399—414) in search ofthe Buddhist books ofdiscipline, trans. James
Legge (Oxford: Clarendon, 1886). Fa-Hsien was the first, and perhaps the most famous, of several
Chinese Buddhist missionaries to India: see I-ching, Chinese monks in India: biography of eminent

monks who went to the western world in search ofthe law during the great T’ang dynasty, tr. Latika Lahiri
(Delhi: Motilal Benarsidass, 1986), p. 12 n. 3. Cf. Jack Finegan, An archaeological history ofreligions of
Indian Asia (New York: Paragon, 1989), esp. pp. 120-2 and 318-19.
8

One substantial work traces the early history of Buddhism in the northern part of the subcontinent,

9

Alien wisdom: the limits of Hellenization (Cambridge University Press, 1975). In a sense the book is
misleadingly titled, given that its main concern is the broader one of ‘the cultural connections between

informed partly by Carl Jung’s interest in eastern religions: Peter Lindegger, Griechische und romische
Quellen zum periphdren Tibet, 3 vols. (Zurich: Libresso, 1979-93 )*

Greeks, Romans, Celts, Jews and Iranians in the Hellenistic period’ (6). Cf. Guy Stroumsa, Barbarian
philosophy: the religious revolution of early Christianity (Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1999), esp. p. 58.

Contexts ofa discourse

254

to offer questions for the study of knowledge at the intersection of cultures. Yet India

does not feature in the book. There is no reference to

India as a place of wisdom, as
to the Indian sages who

it

would later be for Apollonius, nor

made such an impression on the historians of

Alexander.

But there is a general difficulty in considering India’s wisdom, as there is
in considering that of any foreign peoples: to what extent are we justified
in talking about wisdom per se, given the difficulties in defining ancient

notions of wisdom? Any attempt to tell the full story of Greco- Roman wis-

dom would have to pace itself against a major history of Greek philosophy,
and would have to take into account the iconography of the intellectual
(itself a hard human category to pin down), histories of Gnosticism, and
much else besides. Such a task is clearly impracticable 10 Yet again, any
approach to the issue of Greek and Roman travel to India has to deal with
.

the related issues of holiness and wisdom, however provisionally. At the

very least, if we want to examine a particular instance of alien wisdom, it
is

necessary to see it also in light of the non-alien.

It

might be worthwhile to outline at this point some features of wisdom,

II.

WISDOMS ALIEN AND OTHER

as attested in a variety of other sources, as a control against which to test
11
These criteria are offered in the understanding that
no single wise person is likely to exhibit all of them. For reasons that will
become clear in the course of this chapter, the philosopher Pythagoras

the Indian material

.

recurs as a point of comparison.

II. i. Metamorphoses

of sophia

But the prehistory of religious travel proceeds even Pythagoras. Though
Odysseus supposedly ‘knew the minds’ of the peoples he encountered 12
,

he was no religious traveller: such things as he observed, e.g., the harbour
10

W. K. C. Guthrie, A history of Greek philosophy, 6 vols. (Cambridge University Press, 1962-81);

11

The concept of wisdom per se occurs rarely in the standard works of reference, whereas it arises

Paul Zanker, The mask of Socrates: the image of the intellectual in antiquity (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1995).

often in connection with particular persons, notably the Seven Sages; and of particular travellers, in

Hartog, Memories of Odysseus.
12

ttoAAcov S’dvOpcoTTCov i6ev aoTEa Kai voov iyvco (vopov Zenodotus). Odysseus’ intelligence raises
questions of ethical ambiguity: W. B. Stanford, The Ulysses theme, 2nd edn (Ann Arbor: University

of Michigan Press, 1968); Hartog, Memories of Odysseus, pp. 15—39.

Wisdom

2-55

most famously, are viewed and described with a view to their
13
This has been seen as
practical viability for shipping and agriculture
at Scheria,

.

a colonist’s perspective, articulated at the time of Greek expansion into

Magna Graecia. On the other hand, religion is a major part of Herodotus’
ethnographic vision 4 As we saw in Chapter i, Herodotus makes little of
.'

the religious or intellectual world of the Indians, being concerned instead

with the more practical elements of social life. Though Herodotus does not
use the terms Brahman and Gymnosophist, there is one passage in which

he describes an ascetic kind of lifestyle:
However, there is another Indian group with different customs: they neither kill
any being nor plant crops nor build houses: instead they eat vegetables, and they
collect, cook and eat - complete with pod — a certain kind of seed, which is about
the size of a millet-seed and grows without being planted. If anyone takes ill, he
goes to a remote area and lies down, and nobody is concerned whether he is dead
or sick. (3.100) 15

Though this passage refers to an ethnic group rather than a social class, it has
6
sometimes been thought to point to the Brahmans We may note here that
Herodotus identifies this as an ‘alternative’ lifestyle among Indians, these
comments coming in the course of a description of the various groups of
.'

Indians. Given the importance of religion in Herodotean ethnography, this
silence about Brahmans comes as a surprise.

At all events, it is not until the Alexander historians that Brahmans and
Gymnosophists, literally ‘naked philosophers’, come to the forefront of
Indography. (Sometimes the two terms are used more or less interchangeably, sometimes they refer to different groups .'

7

In some cases the term is

used to refer to Egyptian priests, as in Philostratus.)

13

Note, e.g., 6.262-72 and 9.131-141. Cf. Carol Dougherty, The poetics of colonization: from city to
text in Archaic Greece (Oxford University Press, 1993), p. 21; cf.

14

now her The raft of Odysseus: the

ethnographic imagination of Homer's Odyssey (Oxford University Press, 2001).
Walter Burkert, ‘Herodot als Historiker fremder Religionen’, in Herodote et les peuples non grecs

(Vandoeuvres: Fondation Hardt, 1988), pp. 1-32.
15

‘E'TEpcov 6 e ectti ’IvScov o8e aAAos Tpotros- oute kteivoucti ouSev Epvpuyov oute ti crrrEipoucji oute

oiKias vopi^ouai EKTqa0ai Troir^ayEouai te, Kai ocutoTcti <6aTrpi6v ti> ectti octov KEyypos to

pEyaOos ev k&Auki, auTopaTOV ek tt\s yf|S yivopEvov, to auAAEyovTES auTq Trj k&Auki Evpoucn te
Kai CTiTEOVTai."Os 8’av e$ voOaov auTcbv ttectt], eAOcov es tt)v Epqpov keTtot ^povTi^Ei 5e ou8eis

OUTE airoQaVOVTOS OUTE KCCPVOVTOS.
16

See section III.i below for the vacillation between Brahmans as a priestly caste and ethnic, geographically distinct group.

17

Christian[us] Lassen, ‘De nominibus, quibus a veteribus appellantur Indorum philosophi,’ Rheinisches Museum 1 (1833), 171-90, documents the varied use of Gymnosophista,

Bragmanus and other

terms such as Sarmanus/Samanaeus. The pointed distinction between these groups is one reason
that Buddhists may be indicated by the last term: see n. 4 above.

Contexts ofa discourse

256

Though Brahmans and Gymnosophists do not appear in Greek sources
till Hellenistic times, there is already a pre-existing

framework within which

they can be understood, a framework which can be substantiated from

Herodotean ethnography alone: 18 the Histories say much about the priests
of Egypt and Babylonia; as we have seen, one part of Indian society was

thought to follow ascetic practices.

How far in grasping the history of wisdom will a word-study of sophia
and sophos bring us? We would want to know, for one thing, in what sphere
it is that sophia prevails, that someone is sophos. From a number of studies
that have been undertaken on these lines some clear lines of development
can be identified. 19 In Homer, it means expertise in a technical sphere, as
for example in the case of a shipbuilder (Iliad 15.412), and so the use of the
word is to remain through the archaic period. 20 It is only with the references
to the Seven Sages, beginning with Plato ( Protagoras 343a), that the term

takes on its central modern sense, given the variety of skills they embodied,
especially in statecraft.

21

It is with the Seven that expert knowledge (varying, it is true, in degrees of

specificity) becomes mystified knowledge.

A key step in this transition was

the sphere of statesmanship: it is in this sphere that their general skills had
a very specific, socially significant role to play, and a civic aspect involving

moral virtue. This process of mystification depended, in part, on physical
distance. Travel is a standard part of the sage’s repertoire, if not a major
feature: either he came from outside the polis, e.g., Anacharsis, or he was a
local citizen who would go abroad for a spell, as in the case of Solon.

22

For Plato’s time, Socrates of the Apology and the Crito may be regarded
as the sage par excellence, as the embodiment of sophia

18

23
.

His commitment

Following Murray, ‘Herodotus’, much has been made in Chapter 1 above of the ways in which

Herodotus set the terms of Hellenistic ethnography, though this is true for India to only a limited
extent.
19

20

E.g., W. K. C. Guthrie,

The Sophists (Cambridge University Press, 1971), pp. 27-9.

Guthrie, Sophists p. 27.
,

21

For an example of this intermediate stage, see Plut. Them. 2 on Mnesiphilus, whom Themistocles

admired: ‘This man was neither an orator nor one of the so-called natural philosophers, but had

made a special study of what at that time went by the name of “wisdom”. This was really a
combination of political acumen and practical intelligence, which had been formulated and handed

down in unbroken succession from Solon, as though it were a set of philosophical principles.’ Cf.
G. B. Kerferd, ‘The first Greek sophists’, CR 64 (1950), 8-10, at 9, on the use of sophistes here and
elsewhere.
22

Such variations within an identifiable tradition have been illustrated by Andrew Szegedy-Maszak,
‘Legends of the Greek lawgivers’, GRBS 19 (1978), 199-211; and Karl-J. Hohlkeskamp, ‘Arbitrators,
lawgivers and the codification of law in Archaic Greece: problems and perspectives’, Metis 7 (1992),

49-81.
23

Cf. Kleiner Pauly s.v. ‘Sophia’ (Heinrich Dorrie); now

points the way to comparative approaches.

DNP

s.v.

‘Weisheit’ (Franco Volpi et al.)

Wisdom

*5 7

to that cause is proven by his semi-voluntary martyrdom. 24 Socrates may

himself have followed the Pythagorean principle of striving for wisdom,

and it is probably Plato who first used the term ‘philosophy’ in this modern
sense. 25 It is no coincidence that the one explicit story about Indian sages to
precede Alexander’s expedition adheres to the name of Socrates. Aristoxenus

of Tarentum (fl. 320—300 bc) tells the tale that in 399, the year of his death,
Socrates encounters a visiting Indian sage in Athens. Scornfully, the sage tells
Socrates that knowledge of human affairs is not possible without knowledge

of the divine:
Aristoxenus the musician says that the Indians’ version is as follows. One of their

number happened to encounter Socrates in Athens and asked him, ‘How do you
pursue philosophy?’ When Socrates answered that he did so by inquiring into

human life, the Indian laughed, saying that nobody can contemplate human affairs
without knowing the divine 26
.

The question over the historicity of this anecdote need not detain us here. 27
At all events we can note that we see here, unusually, an Indian interlocutor
to Socrates, who by the time of Eusebius had long since come to embody
polytheist thought.

By Aristotle’s time, several changes will have taken place, partly due
to the specialisation and systematisation of knowledge that characterised

the Lyceum. Well before this time, the emergence of the Sophists would be

one factor in the specialisation of knowledge. The controversy surrounding
the Sophists was itself, in an important sense, a crisis over the nature of

wisdom, and one implicit, for example, in debates over the gods and over the
relative status of nomos and physis

24

28
,

Though we cannot regard the Sophists

Tessa Rajak, by identifying parallels between Socrates’ death and that of Eleazar in IV Maccabees
alerts us to a possible Socratic

,

paradigm at work in Hellenistic Judaism: ‘Dying for the law: the

martyr’s portrait in Jewish-Greek literature’, in Portraits: biographical representation in the Greek and

Latin literature of the Roman empire ed.
,

M. J. Edwards and Simon Swain (Oxford: Clarendon,

1997), pp. 39-68, at 58-60.
25

Walter Burkert, Greek religion (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985), p. 306; cf. ‘Platon
oder Pythagoras? Zum Ursprung des Wortes Philosophic’, Hermes 88 (i960), 159-77.

26

<pr)cji 6 Apictto^evos 6 poucjiKos ’IvScov elvai tov Aoyov toOtov. A0t|vticti yap EVTuyeiv ZcoKpaTEi
TGOV avSpcbv EKEIVCOV EVa TIVCC, KOCTTElTa aUTOU 7TUV0dVE(70ai, Tl TTOIGOV (|)lAoaO(}>Oir|. toO 5’
’

eIttovtos, oti £t|tgov TtEpl tou ccvOpcoirivou fMou, KarrayEAdcjai tov ’I vSov, AsyovTa pfi 5uvaa0a(

Tiva tcc avOpcoTtiva kotiSeiv ay vooOvtcc yE Ta 0Eia. Fr. 53 (= Eus. PE 11 3 ), Die Schule des Aristoteles
.

Aristoxenos, ed. Fritz Wehrli, 2nd edn (Basel: Schwabe, 1967), pp. 25 and 67-8. Cf. Wilhelm
Halbfass, India and Europe: an essay in understanding (Albany:
Press, 1988), p. 9.

II.

SUNY

27

Jrlliozat, ‘Valeur des connaissances’, 99-100,

may be alone in advocating its historicity, finding

similarities between this fragment and the teachings of the Upanishad on atman and brahman

.

(The

more usual, sceptical line on this is seen in Jaeger, Festugi&re and earlier scholars there cited.)
28

On the Sophists as a challenge to conventional thought and morality, see, e.g., Burkert, Greek
religion , pp. 311-17. It

is

typical of the nature of the conflict that Socrates was seen by some as a

,

Contexts ofa discourse

258
as a philosophical

movement, it is true, in general, that they tended to

be philosophical relativists, sceptical about the possibility of knowledge of
universal truth’/ 9 The professional status of the Sophists and its attendant

suspicions of venality were to prove politically dangerous in the classical
polis. 3 °

The very term ‘Sophist’ came to carry negative connotations by

the time of Plato. The pejorative sense was well established by the time

Diogenes Laertius was writing in the second century ad (see 1 12 ). Though
.

the Sophists went by the specialised name sophistai rather than sophoi; yet it
is clear that the

bad reputation they had gained gave a bad name to wisdom

generally. As symptoms of the crisis over wisdom we may mention two very

different instances: the execution in 399 bc of Socrates, though so pious

and wise as portrayed by his pupils Plato and Xenophon; and the explicit
problematisation of wisdom (and piety) when Pentheus is killed, despite

having defended the rational order. 31

These changes in the commonly perceived status of wisdom may be considered a pendant to the increasing specialisation in scientific and philo-

sophical thought in Aristotle’s age, a process which was to develop further
in the Hellenistic age. The Museum in Alexandria focused on research,
an activity which attracted the patronage of the Ptolemies, whereas the

Academy and Lyceum had been first and foremost institutions of teaching.

32

It was

in this context of increased specialisation and professionali-

sation that the third and second centuries bc witnessed major changes in

astronomy, biology and other spheres of what we might today call science. 33
Later in the Stoic school of Hellenistic philosophy, one that would prove

and subsequent Roman thought, great
emphasis came to be placed in the sage ( sophos or sapiens) as a bearer of wisso important in late Republican

dom. The Stoic conception of wisdom borrowed from the Platonic/Socratic
paradigm the idea that a series of steps had to be taken on the road to

29
30

Sophist (notably in Aristophanes’ Clouds), though he himself seems to have been hostile towards
them (note, e.g., PI. Hp. mai. 282b-283b).
George Kennedy, A new history ofclassical rhetoric (Princeton University Press, 1994), p. 7.
See, e.g. Josiah Ober, Mass and elite: rhetoric, ideology and the power ofthe people (Princeton University
,

Press, 1989), on the explosive power of oratory in the classical polis.
31

Pointedly expressed at Eur. Bacch. 395; cf. Burkert, Greek religion, p. 317 and E. R. Dodds, Euripides
Bacchae, edited with introduction and commentary (Oxford: Clarendon, i960) ad loc.

32

G. E. R. Lloyd, Greek science after Aristotle (New York: Norton, 1973), p. 3; cf. Fraser, Ptolemaic
Alexandria, esp. vol. 1, pp. 305-35; and Library ofAlexandria, ed. Macleod.

33

‘Two key methodological principles, the application of mathematics to the investigation of natural
phenomena, and the notion of deliberate empirical research, go back to the earlier period which
culminates in Aristotle. What the later period

.

.
.

provides is, above all, examples of the application

of these principles in practice.’ Cf. Lloyd, Greek science
pp. 376-446.

p.

177 and Fraser, Ptolemaic Alexandria,

Wisdom

2 59

wisdom; to this it added the concept of self-sufficiency 34 With the possible
.

exception of Marcus Porcius Cato, this goal could not be attained

35
.

Later still, in the second century ad, the Second Sophistic, represented

would be an age which
saw the reinvention of the sophist-as-rhetorician. With this cultural ideal a
specific, rhetorical concept of sophia became rejuvenated 36 Typically of his
times, Philostratus [saw] sophistry as a philosophical movement embracing
Hellenic wisdom and eloquence in a Neoplatonic synthesis 37 Paideia as a
shared ideal, bonding members of local elites to each other or collectively to
the emperor, was focused most intensely on these philosophers of the later

in this chapter by the biographer Philostratus,

.

‘

’.

Roman empire in the east 38 One might say it fostered the creation of an
‘imagined community’ of learned men based on a selective view of the earlier
.

history of rhetoric 39 In this late-antique world, Greek philosophers became
.

symbols of a common culture among aristocrats over a wide geographical
area. It is against this background that we must consider,

Philostratus’ Life ofApollonius ofTyana

on the basis of

how and why Indian sages captured

,

the imagination.
If this diachronic survey has achieved nothing else,

it

shows the vastly

changing conceptions of wisdom (implied by the changing word-history),

34

On self-sufficiency as an ethical ideal, see Diels-Kranz 86 Ai and 12. Cf. also Glenn W. Most, ‘The
stranger’s stratagem: self-disclosure and self-sufficiency in Greek culture’,

JHS 109 (1989), 114-33,

and Chapter 2, section II. 2 above.
35

Dorrie, ‘Sophia’,

DKP V. 270-1. On Cato’s exemplarity for later generations, see A. E. Astin, Cato

the Censor (Oxford: Clarendon, 1978).
36

For a pointed reminder of the dynamic interface between philosophy and rhetoric during the Second
Sophistic, we do well to recall the career of Dio of Prusa: expelled from Italy and his native Bithynia,
he consulted the Delphic oracle about what he should do. He was told to continue doing what he

had done till he reached the ends of the earth, and took this to mean he should follow the life of an
itinerant, mendicant Cynic sage. See J. L. Moles, ‘The career and conversion of Dio Chrysostom’,

JHS 98 (1978), 79—100, and C. P. Jones, The Roman world of Dio Chrysostom (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1978); Swain, Hellenism pp. 187-241.
,

37

George A. Kennedy, Greek rhetoric under Christian emperors (Princeton University Press, 1983),

On their cultural world, see Glen W. Bowersock, Greek sophists in the Roman empire (Oxford:
Clarendon, 1969). On archaism and a general obsession with the past, E. L. Bowie, ‘Greeks and
p. 137.

their past in the Second Sophistic’,

P&P 46 (1970), 3-41. The skepsis about any supposed ‘Greek

renaissance’, articulated by P. A. Brunt, ‘The bubble of the Second Sophistic’, BICS 39 (1995), 2552, is

now answered by Bowersock, ‘Philosophy and the Second Sophistic’, in Philosophy and power

in the Greco-Roman world: essays in honour of Miriam Griffin , ed. Gillian Clark and Tessa Rajak

(Oxford: Clarendon, 2002), pp. 157—70.
38

39

See Peter Brown, Power and persuasion in late antiquity: towards a Christian empire (Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1992), pp. 35-41 and passim\ Swain, Hellenism and empire.
The term is from Benedict Anderson, Imagined communities: reflections on the origins and spread of
nationalism rev. edn (New York: Verso, 1991), who examines the role of printed texts and maps
in creating fellow-feeling in a later, industrialised age. By virtue of its selectivity, this phenomenon
,

might also be regarded as an instance of the ‘invention of tradition’, to follow Hobsbawm’s essay by
that tide.

i6o

Contexts ofa discourse

and its sensitivity to the specific issues of the day. The political and intellectual crisis surrounding the Sophists of the fourth century bc is something

we must particularly bear in mind as a key point in the reinvention of wisdom. It provided not only the need, but also some of the means by which
such conceptions could be constructed. In this sense, as I shall suggest, the
Brahmans were ben trovati as bearers of wisdom at a time when existing
notions of wisdom had been destabilised.

11.2. Elements of wisdom

From these very general considerations a few features of wisdom deserve
to be isolated 40 The first is that it tends to be individualised, by which I
mean the degree to which it is identified with individual persons 41 This
we see most obviously and importantly in references to the Seven Sages.
Flowever much membership of this group might have varied, its total
number remained constant 42 The phenomenon of writing philosophic
.

.

.

biographies, attested in the works of Diogenes Laertius, Philostratus and

Eunapius from later antiquity, exemplify this tendency. Broadly speaking,
this habit should be understood in terms of the habit of attaching sayings

to a particular person (sayings which may originally have been orally trans-

mitted), with the result that a legend concerning that person springs up.

In the case of Pythagoras, a legend had arisen within a hundred years of his
death (around 570 bc), and Aristotle talks about Pythagoreans rather than
a putative person Pythagoras 43
.

40

In so far as the following criteria are chosen by individuals for themselves rather than ascribed
to

them by others (and that distinction is a difficult one), this may be called self-fashioning, to

follow an oft-cited study: Stephen Greenblatt, Renaissance self-fashioning from More to Shakespeare
(University of Chicago Press, 1980). While the instances we are here dealing with are in the first
instance representations, we should not pretend that there is no element of choice, manipulation

on the part of subjects themselves.
41

This sense of individuality must be distinguished from the tendency to personify wisdom as a char-

we see in the ‘wisdom writings’ of the Old Testament: Job, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Ecclesiasticus
and Wisdom. Much here may be called practical wisdom, with precepts for successful living. Taken
acter, as

together, these and related books reflect much of the Near Easts wisdom tradition, some of which
was later taken over by strands of Christianity. For Gnostics, Sophia was one of the Aeons, bearer

of the female principle, which in various forms could be counterpart to the Father, Christ or the
Saviour: see J. Meyendorff, ‘Wisdom-Sophia: contrasting approaches to a complex theme’,

DOP

4 1 (1987)* 39 I_ 40i; Deirdre Joy Good, Reconstructing the tradition of Sophia in Gnostic literature
(Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1987).
42

See the important article by Richard P. Martin, ‘The Seven Sages as performers of wisdom’, in

43

J. A. Philip, Pythagoras

Cultural poetics in archaic Greece, ed. Carol Dougherty and Leslie Kurke (Cambridge University
Press, 1993), pp. 108-28.

and early Pythagoreanism (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1966); Walter
Burkert, Lore and science in ancient Pythagoreanism (Cambridge University Press, 1972).

,

Wisdom

261

These legends in turn can articulate cultural ideals, as happens both in
the philosophical biographies and in late-antique saints’ lives. 44 Imitatio
Christi, so

important a feature of Christian hagiography, is either tacitly

or overtly held up as something that invites further emulation on the part

of the reader. 45 Just as the saint imitated Christ’s life of self-sacrifice, so is
the saint her- or himself to be imitated. In this way, the written form of
a Christian life is not merely a celebration but an active inducement on

the part of its author. Out of a Christian context, exemplarity adheres to
classical learning itself, the paideia celebrated in the philosophers’ lives of

Eunapius, Philostratus and others. 46 Especially in so far as they contain
doxai (i.e. the distinctive sound-bytes of individual philosophers), 47 these
biographies are themselves performances of paideia. Let us take a moment
to consider what features the lives exhibit, in so far as they represent the
features of wisdom.

The aphorism is the favoured unit for the retailing of wisdom, and it frequently involves a paradox. According to Diogenes Laertius, the aphorism
is the rhetorical feature that characterises

(1.6).

both Druids and Gymnosophists

Now if paradox is central to many ascetic traditions, 48 then it should

come as no surprise that the distinctive forms of discourse show much
of the rhetorical paradox. Historically speaking, this feature can be traced

back to the earliest surviving archaic Greek literature. 49 Theognis’ precepts

on statecraft: would certainly seem to fit Aristotle’s definition of a general
statement. 50 It is here that statecraft emerges as a province of wisdom in
the Greek world, one that changed over time into a kind of social criticism
44 Peter Brown, ‘The saint as exemplar in late antiquity’, Representations 1
(1983), 1-25 on the paradig-

matic function of the saints’ lives. For a general reflection on the dynamics of exemplarity, see Bruce
Lincoln, Authority (University of Chicago Press, 1994).
45

An obvious example is Sulp. Sev. Vita Martini 1. The enjoined imitation of the saint’s life is in
effect imitatio Christi, in so far as the saint himself followed Christ’s example. Christ’s injunction

to renounce the world (Matth. 19:21) would prove to be paradigmatic, as we see, e.g., in the Vita

Antonii 2. Compare the comments of Simon Swain (‘In a tightly controlled system like the Church
the biographic was never simply celebration, but was also part of the disciplinary, normalizing
process’), ‘Biography and the biographic in the literature of the Roman empire’, in Portraits ed.
,

46

Edwards and Swain, pp. 1-38 at 33.
I. Sevcenko, ‘A shadow outline of virtue: the classical heritage of Greek Christian literature’, in The
age ofspirituality, ed. K. Weitzmann (Princeton University Press, 1980), pp. 53-73.

47

The element of personalisation certainly looms large in doxography: see, e.g., Andr6 Laks, ‘Du
t£moignage comme fragment’, in Fragmente sammeln ed. Most, pp. 237-72.
,

48

49

Elizabeth A. Clark, ‘The ascetic impulse in religious life: a general response’, in Asceticism, ed.

Richard Valantasis and Vincent A. Wimbush (Oxford: Clarendon, 1995), pp. 505-10.
Andr£ Lardinois, ‘The wisdom and wit of many: the orality of Greek proverbial expressions’, in
Speaking volumes: orality and literacy in the Greek and Roman world ed. Janet Watson (Leiden: Brill,
2001), pp. 93-108; and Jan Fredrik Kindstrand, ‘The Greek concept of proverbs’, Eranos 76 (1978),
pp. 71-85.

50

On Theognis as a sophistes in the sense of teacher see Guthrie, Sophists, p. 29.

z 62

Contexts ofa discourse

articulated by the lawgivers. Looking much further back in time and farther
east, it is indeed tempting to see continuities between Greco-Roman apho-

risms and those of the Near Eastern wisdom tradition 51 for one thing, the
Apophtbegmata patrum should be viewed as a late, Christianised instance
;

of that Near Eastern tradition 52 Many of these are in the form of injunc.

tions. Indeed these early didactic roots may go some way towards account-

ing for the persistence of the aphorism or sententia as the expression of

wisdom.
In terms of physical appearance, there is a language of gesture that
requires special attention in understanding ancient wisdom 53
.

We shall have

to attend to gesture in discussing the Brahmans and Gymnosophists. As
Zanker has illustrated amply, beards are a distinctive mark of the philosopher, and hence of wisdom 54 Here again, Socrates is an important exemplar, though of course the practice predates him significantly 55 While there
.

.

is

to this some consistency over time, it is true that the imperial age wit-

nessed many philosophical diatribes about the removal of facial (and bodily)
hair 56
.

Most significantly perhaps, social marginality shines through many of
the cases that can be considered. If we take Diogenes Laertius’ life of Dio-

genes as paradigmatic of a particular kind of wise person, we see that the

Cynic philosopher was from the outset a marginal figure, reacting against
social convention, and also against the more conventional approach of the
philosophical schools. By the same token, St Anthony, so central a figure

in early Christian monasticism, inhabited the fringes of society. The harsh-

ness of the Egyptian desert exaggerated not only his personal sufferings but
also his marginal position in relation to society, thereby setting extreme

51

W. G. Lambert, Babylonian wisdom literature (Oxford: Clarendon, i960); cf. M. L. West, East of
Helicon (Oxford: Clarendon, 1997).
Peter Brown, The making opiate antiquity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,

1978), pp. 82-

On this work see Owen Chadwick, Western asceticism (Philadelphia: Westminster, 1958).
On gesture as index of a person’s moral or intellectual life see Jan Bremmer, ‘Walking, standing, and
3.

53

sitting in ancient Greek culture’, in

A cultural history ofgesture, ed. Jan Bremmer and H. Roodenburg

(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992), pp. 15-35; and Patricia L. Cox, Biography in late antiquity

(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983), page xi.
54

In the case of Cynic philosophers they suggest proximity to animals: Michel Onfray, Cynismes.
Portrait du philosophe en chien (Paris: Grasset, 1990), pp. 25—32.

55

A. A. Long, ‘Socrates in Hellenistic philosophy,’

CQ

38 (1988), 150-71, has shown that Socrates’
reputation dropped off somewhat among Hellenistic philosophers. But note continued awareness

of and interest in him on the part of Cynics.

^ A. C. van Geytenbeek, Musonius Rufus and Greek diatribe (Assen: Van Gorcum,

1963), pp. 119—23,

with references; cf. Jaap-Jan Flinterman, Power, paideia and Pythagoreanism (Amsterdam: Gieben,
1995). P- 93-

Wisdom

263

standards for Christian ascetic practice. 57 It has been shown that with the
passage of time (and in particular the rise of Christendom) the pagan holy

man of late antiquity drifted into an increasingly marginal position. 58 The
sage’s capacity to articulate social criticism was a direct result of this.

The activity that many of these wise individuals pursue, that which
in some cases actually brings them wisdom, is travel. 59 This is something

shared by other types, particularly poets, and lawgivers. 60 Travel to India

may be relatively rare in the stories of philosophers, but Egypt features
more prominently. Solon is supposed to have spent ten years travelling
implementing his reforms, 6 and this may be echoed in the travels
of Herodotus and Plato themselves. 62 According to Isocrates ( Busins 28after

'

29), Pythagoras travelled to Egypt, where, naturally enough, he consulted

with priests. Plutarch, after recounting Lycurgus’ travels to Crete and Asia’,
goes on to speak of his supposed travels farther east: the Egyptians claim

Lycurgus visited them too, a claim supported by ‘some’ Greek writers (4.5).

But Plutarch backs off from the claim that he visited India and there held
conversations with the Gymnosophists (and that he visited Libya and Spain
as well): the authority for this claim rests solely with Aristocrates the Spartan,

son of Hipparchus, says Plutarch with a note of caution:

57

Peter Brown, ‘The rise and function ofthe holy man’, in Society and the holy in late antiquity (Berkeley:

University of California Press, 1982), has shown that this marginality played out differently in Egypt

and Syria, given the differences in those landscapes, particularly the harshness of the Egyptian desert
as opposed to the lesser climatic austerity of Syria.
58

The increasing marginality of the pagan holy man has been shown by Garth Fowden, ‘The pagan
holy man in late antique society’, JRS 102 (1982), 33-59, esp. pp. 51-4, with qualifications by Eisner,
‘Hagiographic geography’, 34-5.

59

For a survey of Pythagoras’ travels, see Isidore Levy, La legende de Pythagore en Grece en Palestine
(Paris: Champion, 1927), pp. 20-6.

60

Poets:

Mary R. Lefkowitz, Lives of the Greek poets (London: Duckworth, 1981). Lawgivers (a cat-

egory which overlaps with sages and even poets): Szegedy-Maszak, ‘Legends’. On this branch of
biographical traditions see J. A. Fairweather, ‘Fiction in the biographies of ancient writers’, Ancient
Society 5 (1974), 231-75, where many of the ‘fanciful deductions’ unmasked involve travel. Diogenes

Laertius alone has these to offer (the list is not exhaustive): Thales visits Egyptian priests (1.27);

Plato goes with Euripides to Egypt (3.6); Pythagoras visits Egypt, and speaks with Chaldaeans
and Magi (8.3); Eudoxus visits Egypt (8.87); Democritus visits Egypt, Chaldaeans, Persia, perhaps
India and Ethiopia (9.34-35); Pyrrho visits Indian Gymnosophists and Magi (9.61). See further
G. S. Kirk and J. E. Raven, The Presocratic philosophers (Cambridge University Press, 1957), 77; and
Fairweather, ‘Fiction’, 268. The pattern is clear, and can be summed up in two parts: it suits the
lives of philosophers to have travelled; eastern lands provide the destinations of choice.
61

Ath. pol. 12; Plut. Sol. 26. Solon’s own elegies mention the Nile and Cyprus (Anth. lyr. [3] 6.7D).

Some of these travels actually took place before his reforms. There is a certain amount of flexibility
in the tradition: present at all events is the element of travel.
62

On the travels of Herodotus, compare Chapter
expresses radical scepsis concerning the sages,

(Bern: Lang, 1985).

1, section I.3 above; by the same token, Fehling
Die sieben Weisen und die griechische Chronologie

On Plato, Paul Friedlander, Plato (New York: Meridian, 1958).

264

Contexts ofa discourse

Concerning his travels to Libya and Spain and his discussions with the Gymnosophists in India, I find, on investigation, no source other than Aristocrates the
Spartan, son of Hipparchus. (Plutarch, Life ofLycurgus 4-6) 63

There can be no doubt that this grand tour owes something to Alexander’s
itinerary.

64

About this Aristocrates, Plutarch’s source, we know little beyond

a handful of references elsewhere in the Lives and in Athenaeus.

A prose

writer of the first centuries bc/ad, he seems to have gone beyond the norm
in sensationalising

and glamorising Spartan antiquity. 65 The veracity or

otherwise of Lycurgus’ travels need not trouble us here, in the way that it

troubled Plutarch in writing the above sentence. The point remains, and
underlines a major thesis of this chapter: a claim such as this proceeds from
the assumption that travels bring wisdom, particularly travels to an ancient

land of the east. 66 There is no doubt about the journey to India by Pyrrho of
Elis.

Diogenes Lartius, following Antigonus of Carystus (a contemporary

source) and Ascanius of Abdera, says that it is here that Pyrrho acquired
his sceptical philosophy (9.69, cf. 9.62-63). 6?

II. 3. Jews,

Chaldaeans and Indians

Having reached this point, we are in a better position to consider the
alienness of alien wisdom for a moment. For one thing,

it adds a note
of mystification. It is clear that a number of features mark out the Near

Eastern cultures in the minds of Greeks and Romans.

First, their

sheer

antiquity counted for a great deal, if we are to consider Solon’s interview

with Egyptian priests (Plato Tim. 22b) or Hecataeus’ visit to that land (Hdt.
63

6ti 5e Kcd AifSur|V Kai 'ipqpiav brfjXSEV 6 Auxoupyos Kai Trspi Tqv ’Iv6ikt)v ttXovtiSeIs toTs
T upvoaotfncFTaTs <bpiXr)CT6V, oOSeua trAfiv ApiCTTOKpdtT) tov iTTirapyou 2 TrapTiaTqv EipqKOTa
yiVCOCTKOpEV.

64
65

Elizabeth Rawson, The Spartan tradition in European thought (Oxford: Clarendon, 1969),

p. 94.

For the little available information on Aristocrates see FGrH IIIB 591, cf. RE 2.1 (1895) 941 s.v.

DNPi (1996) 1112 s.v. Arist. 4 (M. Meier).
For further instances see Eisner, ‘Hagiographic geography’, 26 n. 25; esp. Porph. Vita Plotini

Aristokrates 25 (Schwartz) and
66

3 for a

philosopher’s (failed) visit to Babylon and India.
67

Everard Flintoff, ‘Pyrrho and India’, Phronesis 25 (1980), 88-108, ratifies this theory of transmission,

on the basis of detailed comparison with Indian texts. The argument runs very roughly as follows:
similarities can be found between Pyrrho’s and Indian thought; Pyrrho travelled to India (as a
contemporary source indicates); therefore Pyrrho was influenced by Indian thought. I offer this
analysis, at the risk of reductionism, not to caricature what may well be a careful evaluation of the
available evidence, but to show the persistence of an ancient paradigm of thought about religiousphilosophical travel. Less directly than this, M. L. West, Early Greek philosophy and the Orient

,

(Oxford: Clarendon, 1971), sees the Iranian Magi as transmitting Indian (and of course Iranian)
.thought to the Greek world. On the question of looking eastwards to explain features of Greek
philosophy, the pointedly critical comments of A.

H. Armstrong, ‘Plotinus and India’, CQ 30

(1936), pp. 22-8, have not lost their resonance; cf. Momigliano, Alien wisdom, pp. 126-9.

Wisdom
2. 143).

68

265

The whole of Josephus’ Contra Apionem is devoted polemically to

this question, focused on the ‘antiquity’

(

archaiologia or archaiotes) of the

Jews. Secondly, their use of writing per se, particularly in religious contexts,

what has been described as ‘sacral graphocentricism’. 69 Jewish society may
have been the most extreme case of this. 70 In the case of Egyptian and
particularly Babylonian culture, literacy was partnered by highly developed
scientific and mathematical skills.
Thirdly and perhaps most importantly, we must consider the ongoing
dependence of these cultures on a priestly class. An important innovation of
the Hellenistic world, according to Bickerman, 71 was that the onus of studying the law was for the first time placed on individual citizens, lay people
rather than specialists. This change has its roots in Platonic and especially
in universalising Stoic thought; it was adopted by some strands of Judaism,

most obviously in Josephus. On the other hand, Babylonia, 72
Egypt and seemingly also the populations of Syria and Iran resisted this

as we see

development, retaining its reliance on the priestly class. The retention of
archaic languages underscored the inaccessibility of legal texts to lay people:

thus Akkadian, written in cuneiform, continued to be used by Babylonian
priests, and likewise Egyptian, written in hieroglyphics, for the copying of

sacred texts. This is at a time when Aramaic and demotic respectively, and
also Greek would have been the languages of everyday intercourse. What
is

more, the sophistication attained by Near Eastern cultures in the ‘exact

sciences’, particularly in the astronomy and mathematics of Babylonia and

Egypt, 73 was certainly noticed in the Greco-Roman world. To be sure, in

68

E. Bickerman, ‘Origines gentium’, Cl. Phil. 4,7 (1952), 65-81; Louis H. Feldman Jew and gentile in

69

Alan K. Bowman and Greg Woolf, ‘Literacy and power in the ancient world,’ p. 13, in their Literacy

,

the ancient world (Princeton University Press, 1993), pp. 177-8; Erich S. Gruen, ‘Cultural fictions

and cultural identity’, TAPhA 123 (1993), 1-14.

and power in the ancient world (Cambridge University Press, 1994). In the same volume, Martin

Goodman (‘Texts, scribes and power in Roman Judaea’, pp. 99-108) makes the intriguing suggestion,
contrary to what one might expect from modern society, that Romans did not view a society’s ability
to write as a badge of its civilisation. This may be true, but perhaps a more pertinent problem for

consideration here is whether this mattered to Romans, or whether it is more a matter of modern
retrojection.
70

For Goodman ‘[n]o ancient society was more blatandy dominated by a written text than that of
Jews in the Roman period’ in ‘Texts, scribes’, in Literacy and power p. 99.
,

71

E.

J.

Bickerman, The Jews in the Greek age (Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press, 1988),

pp. 172-3.
72

It

so happens that Greco-Roman ideas about Babylonian antiquity are matched by the tendency

of Babylonian scholars to ascribe great antiquity to astronomical and other texts: cf. William W.

73

Hallo, ‘On the antiquity of Sumerian literature’, JAOS 83 (1963), pp. 167-76; Stanley M. Burstein,
‘Callisthenes and Babylonian astronomy’, EMC 28 (1984), pp. 71-4.
O. Neugebauer, The exact sciences in antiquity 2nd edn (Providence, RI: Brown University Press,
,

1957 )-

266

Contexts ofa discourse

the double spheres of astrology and astronomy (to use a predominantly

modern distinction) Greeks and Romans continued to hold eastern practitioners in a certain degree of awe 74 One might go as far as saying that they
.

particularly respected eastern cultures for their scientific skills. Related to
this was the tendency to use the ethnikon Chaldaeus to designate, in principle, any person able to foretell or manipulate the future.

On the strength

of such cases we see one feature of eastern cultures that continued to fascinate Greeks and Romans: the authority of priests as guardians of special

knowledge 75 This role may be considered linked with that of being arbiters
.

of the sacred 76 The fact that this special knowledge often verged on magic
.

both heightened the marginality with which its guardians were regarded

and added to its mystique.
Of the Near Eastern groups mentioned, the Jews were perhaps the most
graphocentric of all 77 In fact the Jews deserve special attention, not least
.

because of their supposed link with Indian philosophers 78 In a passage
well-known for the fact that it represents one of the very earliest Greek
.

references to Jews, Clearchus of Soli in Cyprus speaks of the Jews as being

descended from Indian Gymnosophists:
These people (i.e. Jews) are descended from the Indian philosophers. The philosophers, they say, are in India called Calani, in Syria they go by the territorial name
of Jews; for the region in which they live is called Judaea 79
.

This passage is quoted by Josephus in his diatribe asserting the antiquity of
the Jews. He attributes it to Clearchus, who in turn claims to be quoting
his teacher Aristotle word-for-word.

Of significance here is not so much

the veracity of the claims made, or of the reliability of the various levels of
doxography involved, but the fact of the tendency to see Jews as philosophers, in which regard they are descended from the Indian Gymnosophists.

Now if Greco-Roman notions of origins tended in general to be very
74 See Tamsyn Barton, Ancient astrology (London: Routledge,
1994), p. 9, on the ancient controversy

over whether astrology came originally from Egypt or Mesopotamia.
75

For his comments about Egypt in Homer as a ‘repository of unusual knowledge’, see Momigliano,
Alien wisdom p. 3.
,

76

For magic viewed as special knowledge, see e.g. Fritz Graf, Magic in the ancient world (Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press, 1997), pp. 220-1.
77

Goodman, ‘Texts, scribes’, in Literacy and power ed. Bowman and Woolf, p. 99.

78

On what follows see Emilio Gabba, Greek knowledge ofJews up to Hecataeus ofAbdera (Berkeley:

,

Center for Hermeneutical Studies in Hellenistic and Modern Culture, 1981), esp. pp. 6-7.
79

outoi 5e eiaiv caroyovoi tuv ev *Iv6oTs <}>iAoa6<|>cov, kccAoOvtoci 8e,
<}>aaiv, oi <}>iA6<to<J>oi
napa pev ’IvSoTs KaAavoi, napd 8e lupois ’louSaTot Touvopa AapovTES cnro toO tottou-rrpocrayopEUETai yap ov kotoikoucti tottov louSaia. (Contra Apionem 1.179

See further Momigliano, Alien wisdom

,

p. 75.

=

fr*

6 Wehrli).

Wisdom
loaded,

80

267

then all the more in this case, where they indicate descent.

81

Specifically, it should be noted that there is here no simple parallel between

Indians and Jews tout court, rather the correspondence may be summed up
as follows: Jews are to Coele Syria as Gymnosophists are to India. In other

words, each represents the special philosophical elite of a distant ethnic
group. As it stands, the passage suggests a need on the part of Clearchus to
qualify the statement of who the Jews are, i.e. that Greeks did not know

about them before.

82

In this passage it appears that the less familiar Jews are

presented with reference to the more familiar Indians. This link between

Jews and Gymnosophists is made also in the course of Megasthenes’ detailed
discussion of Indian society, as reported by Clement of Alexandria. 83 How-

Megasthenes merely mentions them together rather than asserting

ever,

descent.

In fact, Clearchus’ interest in the east is attested by an inscription: he
is

mentioned as the one who erected the 147 Delphic maxims on a stele

found in 19 66 at Ai Khanum, the Bactrian city in what is now northern
Afghanistan. 84 There seems no reason to doubt that the Clearchus there

mentioned as having travelled to that point and set up the stele was in fact
85
this same person, and this identity has been accepted by Louis Robert.
It
must, however, be admitted that we have no independent evidence for the
supposed eastern travels of this Clearchus. The provenance of these inscriptions has been interpreted as an indication of the diffusion of Hellenism in
the aftermath of Alexander’s expedition.

80

86

See G. E. R. Lloyd, Revolutions in wisdom (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987), pp. 51-2

on ‘first discoverers’: typically, a supposed originator (mythical or legendary) is invoked to explain
the nature of an object or a custom. More generally, Said, Beginnings explores the extent to which
,

supposed origins are retrojections.
81

As inscriptions from the Hellenistic Near East amply attest, the language of parentage (and with it,
common ancestry) was used to describe the relation between poleis: Christopher P. Jones, Kinship
diplomacy in the ancient world (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999), and Claude
Orrieux, ‘La “parent^” entre Juifs et Spartiates,’ in L'Etranger dans le monde grec, ed. Raoul Lonis

82

Thus Gabba, Greek knowledge p. 34, arguing against the interpretation that Jews were overlooked

(Nancy: Presses Universitaires, 1988), vol. I, pp. 169—91.
,

as powerless.
far:
83

We must, however, be chastened by the ‘doxographic problem’ before pushing this too

the possibility of distortion on Josephus’ part cannot be ruled out.

FGrH 715 F3 = Clem. Alex. Strom. 1.72.4: ‘All opinions expressed by the ancients about nature may
be found also in philosophers outside Greece, some in India by the Brahmans and others in Syria

84

by those called Jews’ (tr. Gabba, ibid., 7).
L. Robert, ‘De Delphes 4 l’Oxus. Inscriptions grecques nouvelles de la Bactriana’, CRAI (1968), 41657 = Opera minora selecta 5 (Amsterdam: Gieben, 1989), pp. 510-51. On Ai Khanum see Chapter 1,
section II. 3.

85

It

may be assumed that the inscriptions appeared too late to permit mention in Wehrli’s second

edition.
86

E.g., Sherwin-White and Kuhrt, Samarkhand to Sardis ; Green, Alexander to Actium, pp. 332-4.

,

Contexts ofa discourse

268
It is

striking that in this passage the plural ‘Kalanoi’

is

used in this

passage. At a certain level it is clear what is happening here: the name of the

Brahman Calanus, known from the Alexander historians, is generalised in
its plural form, as if the process of individualisation is taken further, or even

inverted. The surprise, or indeed ‘misunderstanding’,

87

that the use of

is

What is more, there may be
Aristotle, to whom the comment is

this term is imputed to the Indians themselves.

some chronological awkwardness here:

88

attributed, died in 322 bc; Clearchus wrote relatively soon after Alexander’s

expedition. That a generalising plural should have come into currency so
soon seems unlikely. Thus it would seem unlikely that Aristotle himself
would have made this comment, as the fragment claims him to have done.
If chronology is indeed a problem, then Josephus’ reliability is at issue here.

Diogenes Laertius, in the context of discussing a much broader issue,
preserves another fragment of Clearchus:

Clearchus of Soli in his book On education claims that the Gymnosophists are

descended from the Magi, and some trace the Jews to the same origin 89
.

Here the Magi are brought into the picture, but the claim is the same as
regards Jews and Gymnosophists. Again philosophy is a distinctive ethno-

graphic feature, to the extent that it suggests genealogical descent. It is no
accident, furthermore, that the work of Clearchus cited is on paideia.

This is a fitting point at which to think more about Diogenes’ conception
of wisdom as something to be learned from an older culture. Much of the
prologue to his work is devoted to a sustained argument against the view
that philosophy began with the barbarians:

Some people say that the pursuit of philosophy began with the barbarians. They
claim that the Persians have had their Magi, the Babylonians or Assyrians their

Chaldaeans, the Indians their Gymnosophists, the Celts or Gauls those called

Druids or holy ones

.

.

.

They also claim that Ochus was a Phoenician, Zamolxis

a Thracian and Atlas a Libyan. (1.1) 90

The tendency to speak of Gymnosophists in the same breath as Magi
and Chaldaeans may be regarded as typical in Greek and Roman texts. 91
87

Thus Gabba, Greek knowledge p. 6.

88

This appears not to be seen as a problem by Gabba or Feldman, yen; and gentile, pp. 5 and 204.

89

90

KXsapyos 8e 6 ZoAeus ev tco rTept TtaiSEias Kal tous yupvoaocJnaTas earoyovous eTvcu tcov

Maycov <J>t)criv (Diogenes Laertius 1.9 = Wehrli fr. 13).
To Tfjs <t>iAocro<|>ias iipyov Ivioi <j>aaiv ctrro pap(3apcov ap^ai. yeyevpaQai yap rrapd uev Fltpaais Mayous, trapa 5e Ba|3uAcoviois f| Aaaupiois XaASaious, Kal yuuvoCTOcjucTTds trap’ ’lv8ots,

itapaTE KeAtoTs Kai f aAcrrats tous KaAoupEvous Apui8as Kal IeuvoSeous
'f2x ov KCt ' SppKa ZapoA^iv, Kai Ai|3uv AAavTa.
>

91

Cf. Halbfass, India and Europe, p. 3, on this passage.

.

.

.

OoiviKd te y£VECT8ai,

Wisdom

269

For Diogenes, rival claims to the origins of philosophy involve claims to
antiquity itself: ‘These authors forget that the achievements which they
attribute to the barbarians belong to the Greeks, with

whom not merely

philosophy but the human race itself began’ (1.3). According to Diogenes,

Hermodorus the Platonist and Xanthus the Lydian both speak of a long,
transcultural succession of philosophers: for Hermodorus this goes back to
Zoroaster the Persian, five millennia before the fall of Troy; for Xanthus
there were six millennia between Zoroaster and the expedition of Xerxes
(1.3).

In fact the word Diogenes uses here to indicate succession, diadoche,

recurs in the prologue and later throughout the biographies as a technical

term.

With the help of the epitaph of ‘Theban Linus’, Diogenes claims to have
proven that philosophy originated with the Greeks. Its very name resists
translation into a foreign language:

Thus it was from the Greeks that philosophy arose. Even its name resists translation
into a foreign language. (1.4) 91

This is a striking instance of untranslatability: 93 the phenomenon by which
cultural capital is valued in such a way that it appears specific to its (Greek)

milieu and thus resistant to translation. This alleged specificity is part of the
process by which wisdom is mystified. Diogenes challenges Orpheus’ status
as a founder of philosopher by questioning not his ethnic origins, but his

claim to the title of philosopher (1.5). In this context where the concept of

philosophy is ethnically loaded, it comes as something of a contradiction
that Diogenes should include the Scythian Anacharsis among his list of

Seven Sages. 94

So central to this inquiry is the notion that philosophy began with the
barbarians that we should pause to consider two variants of it, both of
which involve the Brahmans explicitly. First, Lucian in his Fugitivi shows
how cliched it had already become by the late second century ad. In this
parody of a Platonic dialogue, Philosophy in its personified form tells her
father Zeus of the ills she has suffered at the hands of bogus philosophers,

who turn out to be the Cynics. Recalling her reception by humans after
being sent by Zeus, Philosophy has this to say:
92

Kai co8e pev occJCEAAtivgov f)p£e <J>iXoao<J>ia, fjs Kai ccuto to ovopa tt)v pdp(3apov a-TTecrrpa'TTTai

93

Jan Assmann, ‘Translating gods: religion as a factor of cultural (un)translatability’, in The translatability of cultures ed. Sanford Budick and Wolfgang Iser (Stanford University Press, 1996),

TTpooTiyopiav.

,

pp. 25-36.
94

On Anacharsis see Richard

P.

Martin, ‘The Scythian accent: Anacharsis and the Cynics’, in The

Cynics ed. Branham and Goulet-Caz6, pp. 136-55.
,

Contexts ofa discourse

270

When I darted off, father, I did not head directly for the Greeks; but, since it
seemed to me the harder part of my task to educate and teach foreigners, I resolved
Heading initially for the Indians, the most populous nation in
I had no trouble in persuading them to descend from their elephants
and converse with me. As a result the Brahmans, an entire tribe bordering on
the Nechraei and the Oxudracae, are all recruited under my command: they not
only live in accordance with my tenets, revered by all their neighbours, but die a
spectacular kind of death. ( Runaways 6) 95
to do that first.

.

.

existence,

Much of this dialogue is devoted to comment on the death of Peregrinus, and will be discussed in this connection. Some room must of course

be made for ethnographic caricature, typical of Lucian’s parodic modes

and seen here especially in the reference to elephants. Here the idea of
the barbarian origins of philosophy is first inverted (at first she expected

the Greeks to be amenable to her), only to be explicitly restated. From the

Brahmans she went to Ethiopia, then to priests and prophets of Egypt,
then to the Chaldaeans and Magi of Babylon, then to Scythia and Thrace
(para. 8); and only then to the Greeks, who gave her no more than a cool
welcome (9). In this work Lucian is able to use an already well-worn idea
in order to scorn a particular branch of Greek ‘philosophers’, namely the

Cynics.

Secondly, Clement of Alexandria (c. AD 215) offers a slightly later variant
which reveals the generally more positive Christian attitude to Brahmans.
In a passage already referred to for its juxtaposition of Brahmans and Jews,
Clement is favourably disposed to the Brahmans because their study of
nature has brought them the outlines of Greek philosophy. 96 Elsewhere
he is, however, critical of the Brahmans for their exhibitionism in death
{Strom. 3.7).

A significant feature of alien wisdom to be brought out might be called
ambivalence. We have already seen a Greco-Roman tendency to link
astronomy and mathematics with Mesopotamians (Babylonians, Magians
its

and Chaldaeans) and to a lesser extent Egyptians. This connection could be

95

Hi^cc psv, co TTcrrep, ouk etfi tous "EAAijvas eu0us, aAA’oiTEp e6okei poi xoAettcotepov toO Epyou
eTvcu, to (3ap(3apous ttcuSeueiv Kai SiSckjkeiv, touto upcoTov t)£iouv Epydcrao-0ar

.

.

.

oppfjaaaa

6e eis ’Iv6ous to irpcoTov, E0vos pEyiaTOv tcov ev tco (3ico, ou xccAettcos EirEiaa KcrrapavTas

aaro tcov eAe<J>6cvtgov Ejaoi auvEivai, coctte Kai yEvos oAov, oi

Bpay moves, toIs NEypaiois Kai

O^uSpaKais opopov, outoi toTs Nsxpaiois Kai O^uSpaKais opopov, oOtoi iravTES utt’ Epoi
TaTTOVTai Kai (3io0aiv te kotoc tcx r)plv BokoOvto, TipcopEvoi irpos tcov TTEpioiKcov airavTcov,
Kai caro0vf)CTKOuai irapaSo^ov Tiva tou 0avcrrou TpoTrov.
96
On barbaros philosophia see A. Dihle, ‘Indische Philosophic bei Clemens Alexandrinus,’ in Dihle,
Antike und Orient pp. 78-88, at 78, and cf. 219.
,

.

Wisdom

271

made in a neutral or even complimentary way 97 On the other hand there
.

was a dark side to this too

98
,

perhaps inevitably, if we consider that the

strict modern division between astronomy and astrology was not

made till

relatively late (Ptolemy makes this point polemically in the introduction

to his Tetrabiblos)

.

Terms such as magus, mathematicus and Chaldaeus each

have a range of valences, which at their most negative speak volumes for the
pariah status of ‘magicians’ and ‘quacks ’. 99 The miracle-working element of

the Christian holy man has emerged as one of his most important features,

but it is certainly not limited to him 100
.

These various elements lead us to validate the working definition of

wisdom as knowledge that is mystified 101 We must, above all, be alert to
.

a politics of knowledge in which secrecy, exoticism, authority and paideia

play their part.

10-

Mystification in this sense is a means of establishing

authority, a way that differs, say, from the systematisation of knowledge in
103

the corpus of medical writings attributed to Galen
Above all, we should
note from the foregoing discussion that, jn so far as wisdom is the preserve
.

of foreign peoples, it has an inaccessible quality, one that might even make
it impossible to

be known: this is part of its status as special knowledge. The

secrecy incumbent on initiates to Pythagoreanism, though not necessarily
a foreign wisdom in the first instance, may be taken as a Greek case of this

phenomenon.
So much for the features of wisdom, and particularly of ‘alien wisdom’,
that can be isolated in theory. It is time for us to consider Brahmans, and to
ask in what ways Brahmans fit the mould outlined, and to what extent the
literary image of them combines on the one hand this mystified knowledge

we have been calling wisdom and on the other hand the features of holiness.
97

Strictly speaking, the Chaldaeans were originally an ethnic group, which arrived in Babylonia
around the ninth century bc: Amalie Kuhrt, The ancient Near East (London: Routledge,

98

A notable case comes when Cato forbids the uilicus (overseer) to consult with fortune-tellers: arus-

1994),

p. 399. Greek and Latin uses of the term exhibit massive generalisation, with the inevitable loss of
its original ethnic

referent. The same process is at work with the Magi.

picem, augurem, hariolum, Chaldaeum nequem consuluisse uelet (Agr 7.4). In this context xenophobia
99

coalesces with prejudice against magic.
Note, e.g., Graf, Magic ch. 2; W. J. W. Koster, ‘Chaldaer’, A4CII.ioo6-2i, esp. 1019.
,

roo

R. Reitzenstein, Hellenistische Wundererzahlungen (Leipzig: Teubner, 1906), examining the theme
of miracle-working in a wide variety of texts, among holy men, magicians, thaumaturges and others.

On the concept of mystification (and its attempted reversal on the part of modern scholars) see,
e.g., G. E.
101

R. Lloyd, Demystifying mentalities (Cambridge University Press, 1990).

On the politics of special knowledge see the important study of Marie-Therese Fogen, Die Enteignung der Wahrsage. Studien zum kaiserlichen Wissensmonopol in der Spdtantike (Freiburg: Suhrkamp,
1993 )-

103

Dale B. Martin, Inventing superstition: from the Hippocratics to the Christians (Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press, 2004).

Contexts ofa discourse

272
It will

become clear that Brahmans and Gymnosophists emerged substan-

tially after Alexander’s expedition.

III.

BRAHMANS AND GYMNOSOPHISTS
III. i. Social hierarchy

In order to consider the Brahmans, the Indian ascetics par excellence, we

need a historical context. In sketching this we must draw on a wider range of
sources before focusing on Palladius himself. Just who were these Brahmans
that made such an impression on Greek and later Roman writers?

Turning first to Indian sources, we hear of Brahmans spoken of unequivocally as a social group, i.e. as a ‘caste’ in terms of the varna system. The

Purusa-sukta (Hymn of man) is one of the hymns dealing with the creation,

and it is here that we find classical Indian literature’s most significant reference to Brahmans: the gods create the world by dismembering the primeval
giant Purusa:

His mouth was the Brahman,
his two feet were made the warrior,

104

his two thighs the Vaisya;

from his two feet the Sudra was born.
(Rig Veda 10 90 12)
.

.

By linguistic evidence it is known to be one of the last of the Rig Veda
to be composed, and it can be dated to as late as around 500 bc This is
.

the earliest Indian reference to the system of four social classes or varnas,

and the only one in the Vedas 105 (The historical problem that this refers
to four castes, compared to the seven in Greco-Roman sources, need not
concern us here: see Chapter 2.) The term brahmana originally applied
to one possessing the mystical force, brahman. Its earliest use was for the
priest overseeing the entire sacrificial ritual, and who could by his magical spells counteract the evil influence eventuating from minor errors
of ritual. By the end of the Vedic period its use had been broadened to
.

104

rajan-ya (‘royal’ or ‘warrior’), the name given to the second caste, is related to word raj, ‘rule’ (cf.

105

Arthur A. Macdonell (ed.), A Vedic reader for students (Oxford: Clarendon, 1917), p. 201; Wendy

Latin reg-). After the Vedic period the term ksatriya was used instead for this group: A. L. Basham,

The wonder that was India, rev. edn (New York: Hawthorn: 1963), p. 141.

Doniger O’ Flaherty (ed. and tr.), The Rig Veda (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1981), p. 30. On
the interpretation of this passage in terms of Indian historical consciousness, see Romila Thapar,
‘Society and historical consciousness: the Itihasa-Purana tradition’, in Situating Indian history: for

Sarvapalli Gopal ed. Sabyasachi Bhattacharya and Romila Thapar (Oxford University Press, 1986),
,

PP- 353 83 at 356-7.
.

Wisdom

273

refer to all members of the priestly class. After the Vedic period the Brah-

man class, already split into septs (gotrd), divided further into branches
(sakha), determined by the choice of which recension of the Vedic texts was

honoured.
In terms of the social structure that transpires from texts such as the
Laws ofManu (though much later, round the turn of the millennium, in
its

extant form, it reflects an already old tradition), we know of various

further subdivisions.

106

Among these were the semi-legendary rshis who
,

combined the roles of seer and composer of the sacred Vedic texts. 107 For
the performance of sacrificial duties there were a number of priests ( rtvij):

invokers ( hotr), cantors ( adgatr) and those carrying out the rituals by hand

adbvaryu ).

(,

By virtue of this priestly capacity, the Brahmans may be regarded India’s
Most of the Brahman class lived off

arbiters of the sacred par excellence.

royal patronage, but some owned land which was worked by peasants. That

they are socially distinct from other groups may be deduced from Manus
injunction (4.84) that Brahmans do not accept gifts from members of the
ksatriya class. Serving as the king’s council, those brahmans in the purohita
108

had great influence.
These would appear to match Megasthenes’
group of ‘councillors’ (FGrH 715 F4 = Diod. 2.41.4).
class

There is ample Indian evidence for Brahmans leading lives devoted to
religious observance,

remote from the rest of society. Kalidasa’s Sakun-

tala gives an almost utopian picture of communities of Brahman hermits

living in forests,

supported by gifts of the king and of nearby peasants.

However, the Laws of Manu and other Smrti

texts suggest that most
Brahmans are likely to have lived less idyllic lives, if we are to take into

account stipulations about their involvement in loans and trade. There was
certainly a stigma attached to professional activity on the part of Brah-

mans, and this was sometimes expressed in the form of satire at their
expense.

The key passages on Indian society generally have been traced by Jacoby
back to Megasthenes; so too those on the Brahmans. 109 In a lengthy

106

For what follows I am indebted to Basham, The wonder pp. 139-41.

107

The coincidence in number between the Seven Rshis of Indian mythology with the Seven Sages
of the Greek tradition does not mean we should see a connection through Indo-European roots:

,

Martin, ‘Seven sages’, p. 121, and John E. Mitchiner, Traditions of the Seven Rsis (Delhi: Motilal
Benarsidass, 1982).
108

Basham, The wonder p. 100.

109

Jacoby’s grounds for identifying Megasthenes as the source for Diodorus’ long Indographic passage

,

2.35-42 are more tenuous than might initially appear: Chapter 1, section II. 2 above.

274

Contexts ofa discourse

description of Indian social organisation, we read the following about the

group 110 of philosophers’:
(i) The entire population of India is divided into seven castes (mere), the
first
of which comprises the tribe of philosophers — outnumbered by the other castes

but exceeding them in pre-eminence. Being exempt from all public duties, they
are neither anyone’s masters or servants. (2)

However, they are called upon by

private citizens to offer all the sacrifices due in their lifetimes and to hold rites for

those who have died, for they are considered to have shown themselves dearest to
the gods and especially adept in matters concerning Hades, and for this service
they receive gifts and honours. To the population of India as a whole they perform
enormous services: assembling in a huge gathering at the start of the year, they tell
the populace about droughts, rains, favourable winds, diseases, and whatever is
useful to those listening. (3)

.

.

.

[Both king and ordinary people make provisions

The philosopher who goes astray in his forecast receives no
punishment other than criticism and spends the rest of his life in silence. ( FGrH
111
715 F4 = Diod. 2.40. 1-3)
accordingly.]

.

.

.

We must note that these ‘philosophers’ serve priestly functions (note paragraph 2 above): this combination is not characteristic of the Greco-Roman
world’s pagan priesthoods. 112 The fact that they preside over sacrifices marks

them out as ‘pagan priests’, ones whose priesthood is further sanctified by
their status as philosophers. 1 ' 3

In Diodorus’ long passage this, however, not the only meros with which

we can identify the historical Brahman. Of the seventh caste Diodorus has
the following to say:

The seventh caste is that of deliberators and councillors, whose concern is with the
decisions affecting shared interests. Numerically this group is the smallest, but in
nobility of birth and in prudence it is the most deserving of admiration, for the

110

On problems surrounding the use of the term ‘caste’, see Chapter

i,

section 1 1.2.

to

Trav TrAf) 0 os tcov Iv8cov els etttcx pepr) 8if)pr|Tai, cov eoti to pev irpcbTov auo"rr]pa
<J>iAoao<l>cov, ttAtiQei pev tcov aAAcov pepcov Aeitropevov, Trj 8’ euK^avelpc TravTcov TrpcoTeOov.
dAeiToupyr)Tot yap ovtes oi <J>iA6ao<J>oi Tracrris Oiroupyias ou0 ETEpcov Kupieuouaiv ou0 u^’
’

’

ETEpcov Secmo^ovTai. irapaAap(3 dvovTai 8 Otto pev tcov ISicotcov eis te Tas ev tco plco Quotas
’

Kai eis Tas fwv teteAeutt|kotcov ETripeAeias, cos QeoTs yeyovoTes Trpoo<|)iAEOTaToi Kai Trepi tcov
ev a8ou paAiOT’ ep-Treipcos exovtes, toOttis te t^s UTtoupyias 8d>pa te Kai Tipas Aappavouaiv

a^ioAoyous' tco 8e koivco tcov ’Iv8cbv peyaAas TrapeyovTai
XP £ a 5 TCxpccAapPavopevoi pev
koto to veov etos ETti tt)v peydAr)v auvo8ov, TrpoAeyovTes &£ toTs ttAt) 0 eoi Trepi auxpcov
^

Kai ETTopAeyovTES 8 e toTs ttAtiOeoi irepi auxpwv Kai eiropPpias, eti 8’ avepcov euiTvoias Kai

voacov Kai tcov aAAcov tcov Suvapevcov tous aKouovTas cb^eAhaai. ... 6 8’ airoTuxcov tcov
(|>

iAoo6<t)cov ev Tats TrpoppTiaeaiv aAArjv pev oOSepiav ava8ex£Tat Tipcopiav r|

pAao^piav,

d(J>covos 8 e SioteAeT tov Aoittov piov.
112

Pagan priests: religion and power in the ancient world ed. Mary Beard and John North (London:
\

Duckworth, 1990).
113

E.g., ibid., pp. 8—9; John Scheid, ‘The priest’, in The Romans, ed. Andrea Giardina (University
of
Chicago Press, 1993), pp. 55-84, at 57-9.

Wisdom

275

king’s advisors and the administrators of the affairs of state and judges of disputes
are drawn from among them, and generally speaking they take their leaders and

magistrates from among these people. (2.41. 4) 114

Within Arrian, for one, there is some degree of confusion as to whether
the Brahmans are a tribe or a class. In most cases he talks about them as a
tribe, but at anab. 6.16.5 he seems to be referring to them as a sect rather

than a tribe, as instigators of a rebellion against Alexander’s conquest (cf.
6.17.2). At this

point Arrian, in a curious remark, promises that later in

more about the wisdom of the Brahmans, ‘if that
what it is’, a promise that is not realised in the surviving work. 115 It is
worth noticing here that as soon as Arrian refers to the group, ‘the sages
his Indica he will tell
is

of India’, he refers to their wisdom, yet he seems to question the nature
of that wisdom. If this interpretation is correct, we might take it to be a

reminder of the fragility of ‘alien wisdom’.
Pliny in his Natural history (6.64) speaks of the Brahmans as follows, as

an umbrella ethnic group:

The races that deserve mention as we leave the Hemodi mountains ... are the Isari,
Cosiri, Izi, and spread across the mountains the Chirotosagi and several tribes with

the name of Bragmanae, among them the Mactocalingae. 116

This is part of Pliny’s geographical survey of northern India, and he mentions Brahmans here in order to characterise the region. In fact, they will

have been found much farther south than Pliny indicates, so that his geographical accuracy on this score is poor.

A short while later, speaking of the social divisions of the Indians of the
Ganges valley, Pliny states that there are five groups or genera, to which
a further one of half-wild people is added at the end.

The fifth of these

has the features we expect to identify with the Brahmans, yet nowhere does
Pliny make such a connection:

114

ef^Sopov 8

icrri

pipos to (SouAeOov pcv Kai auvESpeOov tois Orrep tuv koivcov (3ouAevopevoi5,

ttAt]9ei psv eAdytcrrov, EuytvEia 8e Kai ppovfiaei pdAujTa 0aupa£opEvov ek toutcov yap 01 te

cruppouAot toT; paaiAeOaiv Eiciv 01 te StoiKT|Tai tcov koivcov Kai oi SiKacrrai tcov ap<|>ia|3r|toupevcov, Kai Ka0oAou tous pyspovas Kai tous apyovTas ek toutcov iyouai.
1.5

Cette
p cbv (sc. Bpaypavcov) lyco Tfjs cro<f>las, si 84 tIs ecttiv, ev tIJ 'IvStKij §uyypa<|>Tj SpAcbaco.
This is not enough to sustain the idea that the second section of Palladius’ text is indeed Arrian’s,

as

it

claims to be (1.15): for one thing, it is not in his style to indulge in such long speeches as

characterise that part of the work. See William H. Willis and Klaus Maresch, ‘The encounter of
Alexander with the Brahmans,’ ZPE 74 (1988), 59-83, at 61-2, with refs.
1.6

quas memorare non pigeat a montibus Hemodis,
Isari, Cosiri, Izi et per iuga Chirotosagi
multarumque gentium cognomen Bragmanae, quorum Mactocalingae.
Stoneman, ‘Naked philosophers: the Brahmans in the Alexander historians and the Alexander

gentes,

.

.

.

Romance', JHS 115 (1995), 115-29 at 101-2 compares Strabo 15.1.66 C716.

276

Contexts ofa discourse

There is a fifth class of persons devoted to wisdom, a group highly esteemed by
them and nearly raised into a religion; they always end their life by suicide upon
a pyre that is already set aflame. (6.66) u?

Somewhat surprising here is that, in emphasising the respect that the
Brahmans command as practitioners of wisdom, Pliny implies that they
are themselves nearly honoured as gods.

We may also notice that self-

immolation is given as one of their features. Presumably this is an extrapolation from the story of Calanus. 118
Several of the Greek and Roman references to Brahmans present them
as teachers.
( fLor .

Thus Apuleius, in speaking of the education of Pythagoras

15.11-13), mentions lessons among the Indian sages, both Brahmans -

hi sapientes uiri sunt, Indiae gens est - and Gymnosophists. In the same

breath he mentions mathematical lore taught by the Egyptian priests and
the astrology taught by the Chaldaeans. In this group the Brahmans stand

out for their ability to withstand bodily hardships:

The Brahmans have combined the general principles of Pythagoras’ philosophy:
physical and mental discipline, the number of parts of the soul, and stages of life,
the torments and rewards everyone’s spirit receives according to merit. (15.13) 119
It is also in their role as teachers that

Ammianus mentions them, following

on his excursus on the ‘land of the Magi’ (23.6.33). In this case their pupil is
Zoroaster, presented as a Bactrian sage. 120 Apollonius pays homage to them
also as a pupil reverences a teacher.

121

It is this didactic role that

we should

bear in mind when Alexander meets the Brahman Dandamis.
In Chapter 1 we caught a glimpse of Calanus the renegade, the subject

of Dandamis’ harsh words. Here and in the Palladius text discussed below

he emerges as a complex figure, especially when we measure up the various
texts against

each other.

122

Arrian (Anab 7.2-3) speaks of Calanus’ lack
.

117

quintum genus celebratae illis (Mayhoff, illi[c] tradd.) et prope in religionem uersae sapientiae deditum

118

The practice of sati among Indian widows is discussed separately in Chapter 2, section II. 5.

119

Bracmani autem pleraque philosophiae eius contulerunt, quae mentium documenta, quae corporum

uoluntaria semper morte uitam accenso prius rogo finit.

exercitamenta, quot partes animi, quot uices uitae, quae diis manibus pro merito suo cuique tormenta
uel praemia.

On this passage see the lengthy note by Andr6 and Filliozat, L’Indey pp. 379-81.
120

Joseph Bidez and Franz Cumont, Les mages hellenises. Zoroastre, Ostanes et Hystaspe d'apres la tradition
grecque (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1938), vol. I, p. 27 and vol. II, p. 96 n. 2, write this reference off as too
late to be trustworthy. Certainly

Ammianus uses poetic, evocative language in his brief description.

An unusual feature of this passage is his reference to the astrological observation of the Brahmans rationes mundani motus etsiderum - which may be explained by their supposed link with the Magi.
121

122

Jer. Ep. 53.1; Sid. Apoll. Epist. 8.3.4.

R. Stoneman, ‘Who are the Brahmans? Indian lore and Cynic doctrine in Palladius’ de bragmanibus

and its models,’ CQ 44 (1994), pp. 500-10, at 505.

Wisdom

277

of self-control, thereby echoing the negative side of what Strabo describes
as a dispute in the sources (15.1.68 C718).

But when Plutarch has him

reciting a parable {Alex. 8.65) there is no hint of a negative attitude on the

author’s part, nor presumably that of his source. In Philo he receives an

outstandingly good press: he is praised for his exemplary, truly philosophic
attitude, and, by implication, for his denial of the flesh in taking his life. 123 It
is possible that Philo is well disposed to the Indians in

view of the supposed

link between Jews and Indians we have seen in Josephus. 124

On the other

hand, several fathers of the church are negative towards the Brahmans:

when Tertullian claims that Christians do indeed help to support the state,
he does so by contrasting them to the socially aberrant Indian sages: ‘for

we are not Indian Brahmans or Gymnosophists, forest-dwellers and exiles
from life’. 125 The point of comparison is, properly, with Indians in general,
but the reference to the Brahmans and Gymnosophists tacitly reaffirms the
Christians’ own status as philosophers of a kind. 126 This is taken further

by Augustine, who opposes the notion of salvation for the Indians and
scorns their marginal status relative to society and their distance from the

Christian faith:

The gymnosophists of India, also, who are said to practise philosophy in the jungles
of India without clothing, are citizens of that [earthly] city, and yet they abstain

from procreation. For such continence is good only when it takes place in keeping
with faith in the highest good, which is God. {City of God 15. 20) 127
Clearly we are dealing with a wide range of opinions, among Christian

and others. Of these, it was to be the positive one that would
predominate in the medieval west. 128

writers

Within Indian texts there is also a substantial degree of variation in
the presentation of Brahmans. 129 Much of Sanskrit literature was actually
produced, or at least written down, by Brahmans, and tends consequently to
represent their perspectives and interests.

123

On the other hand, Buddhist texts

In the quod omnis probus liber est 14.92-96 he is among the dvSpcov aya6cbv; cf. the general

comment at vita Abraham 33.181—82 on the praiseworthiness of the Gymnosophists and their wives
in readiness to face death.
124
125

126
127

Cf. section II. 3 above.

neque enim Brachmanae aut Indorum gymnosophistae sumus, sylvicolae et exules vitae {apol. 42.1).
Cf. section II.3 above.
et Indorum Gymnosophistae, qui nudi perhibentur philosophari in solitudinibus Indiae, dues eius mundi

sunt, et a generando se cohibent. non est enim hoc bonum nisi cum

fit secundum fidem summi boni, qui

Deus est.
128

This was partly as a result of the strength of the Alexander legend: Thomas Hahn, ‘The Indian
tradition in western medieval intellectual history’, Viator 9 (1978), 213-34.

129

On Sanskrit representations of Brahmans see Basham, The wonder pp. 139-41.
,

Contexts ofa discourse

278

generally exalt the ksatriya class over the Brahman. This is usually done with

reverence for the Brahmans. These sources portray very different kinds of

Brahman, and in so doing offer very different attitudes to priestly practices
performed by members of the class. Here we find both learned Brahmans,
performing rituals and receiving due reverence; but also village Brahmans,

who live by fortune-telling and sorcery, and are less honoured. In fact, the
fool ( vidusaka) in Sanskrit drama is typically presented as a Brahman; just
as he is gluttonous, so

bibulousness is sometimes linked with Brahmans.

Sanskrit sources portray the Oxudrakai group, who are admittedly on the
fringes of Brahman society, as one of the many disorderly people of the

Punjab. 130

III. 2. Alexander’s interview: Palladius

It is

and others

against this complex background that we must turn to a late-antique

story about Brahmans. In Chapter

1

we saw that the Brahmans came

into view during Alexander’s campaign. Indeed, they might be considered, together with the details of Indian social structure, to be the major

addition to Greek Indography to emerge from the campaign. Thus it is
that an account of Alexander’s journey now occupies us: not one of the
earliest, certainly,

but a text that describes them in vivid detail. 131 This is

the treatise On the life ofthe Brahmans attributed to Palladius and transmit,

ted on the fringes of the Alexander romance tradition. It survives in both a

Greek version and in a Latin translation erroneously ascribed to Ambrose.
Because of the obscurity of this work and its importance to this chapter, I
shall summarise it before embarking on an analysis. The summary in itself

will bring to light various aspects of wisdom touched on above, and these

aspects will be further teased out in what follows.

As it now stands, the work falls into two disparate sections. In the first,
the primary narrator tells what he has learned about the Brahmans and how.

He has not been to this distant and dangerous place, having fallen ill and
had to turn back on his travels in that direction (1.1). He did, however, find
130

O. Stein, RE 36.2024—32, at 2031, s.v. Oxudrakai; Karttunen, Hellenistic world, pp. 216—18, 226—8;
Bosworth, Commentary vol. II, p. 219.

131

The role of Brahmans in the Alexander historians has been touched on above in the introduction,

,

so that text of Palladius is offered to indicate a different and perhaps more complicated strand in

an alternative tradition. It is for two reasons that I choose this text over the much more widely
disseminated Alexander romance, first, it was composed by a Christian bishop, of whom we have
other writings; secondly, the Alexander romance has already received comprehensive treatment by

Stoneman, ‘Naked philosophers’. The first of these reasons makes it possible for us to set the work
in a Christian milieu.

Wisdom

279

out much from a Theban scholar who travelled there of his own accord,

was captured and used the opportunity to study the Indians. This Theban,

who becomes the secondary narrator for much of the rest of section I, sails
first

to Adule and Axum in his quest for the island of Taprobane. Here in

Axum, ruled by a local Indian king, 131 he joins some local Indian traders
who are setting out for the land of the big-headed Bedsades. Once among
the Bedsades, he is taken captive and charged with trespassing, and taken
to the leader.

He can neither understand what is being said to him, nor

make himself understood, in the absence of a translator. He is convicted to
work in the royal bakery, where he remains six years, long enough to learn
the language and find out about the way of life of the residents (1.9). He
gains his release during a clash between the local potentate and another:
the great king forces the ruler of Bedsades to release the traveller to avoid
slighting the powerful Roman state (this results from the intervention of

the opposing potentate, 1.10).

At this point the primary narrator resumes, recounting various details
about the Brahmans: they are set aside by divine dispensation, they keep

no animals and don’t farm, they eat only what the earth produces of its

own accord; they pray unceasingly, gazing at the sky rather than eastward,
though they have only little knowledge of God and of Providence (1.12—13).

They live on the far side of the Ganges, their wives on the near side; they
meet only a short period every year for the purpose of procreation, and
only produce up to two children - the reason their race is not numerous.
The river Ganges is hard to cross in view of the very long Odontotyrannus,
big enough to swallow an elephant whole. Near the rivers are very large
serpents, of which I have seen only the skin. The primary narrator ends off

by saying that he is enclosing a work by Epictetus’ student Arrian, one that
provides the recipient with a moral code worth following (1.15).

The second section begins by presenting itself as the comments of Dandamis, teacher of the Brahmans.' 33 Alexander was dissatisfied with Macedonia and desired to rule our part of the world as well, on the false pretext that
his father was

Ammon (2.1). He prayed to Wisdom, mother of Providence,

for a meeting with the Brahmans, having heard about them from Calanus
(2.2). The Brahmans and Indians spoke to Alexander as follows: you have
come to us in search of wisdom, which we gained and which rules our lives.

132

Again we have here the conflation of Ethiopia and India. When Taprobane is described as the place
where the great Indian king rules over minor potentates ‘as over satraps’, the comparison with Persia

133

This introduction varies in the different manuscripts; its authenticity is brought into question by

is

striking.

the switch to the third person at 2.12.

2.8

o

Contexts ofa discourse

We philosophers are not subject to worldly rulers (2.3). Calanus, through
whom you came to know about us, was a wicked man, for he pursued
wealth, and the riches which he obtained made a backslider out of him,

though he had drunk the Tiberoboam’s waters of self-control (sophrosune
2.4).

,

We are by nature without riches, and death is our companion; wear-

ing nothing, in accordance with nature, and see no virtue in killing other
people, but have conquered our inner warfare and regard the demands of
desire our enemy (2.5-7). Your definition of a philosopher, on the other

hand, is one who talks too much, and even pursues luxury, wealth and

power (2.8). (There is a fair degree of repetition here, in which Dandamis
pointedly contrasts the Brahmans’ renunciation of worldly goods with the

Macedonians’ desire for the same.)
Calanus left the fold, having fallen prey to avarice and become unworthy
of God’s love (2.10). But there is among our number a man who lives in the
forest, Dandamis: it is to him that Alexander is taken when he asks to speak

to their leader (2.11-12). Because he could not see him lying in the forest

he sends Onesicritus, 134 who at first tries to lure Dandamis with a mixture
of death-threats and promises of gifts (2.13-14). Dandamis’ response is that

Alexander is not immortal and hence in no position to threaten; he disdains
the gifts, because his simple life suffices, and ignores the threats (2. 15-17).

Alexander will have to come to him if he wishes an interview (2.18).
Intrigued by Onesicritus’ report, Alexander goes to the forest with fifteen soldiers to meet Dandamis. When he says he wishes to learn God’s
wisdom, he is told that his worldly desires have left no room in his heart
for this: his geographical ambitions are singled out (2.20-21). Dandamis’

cross-questioning of Alexander culminates with his central, paradoxical
creed: desire nothing, and everything will be yours; desire ( epithumia ) is the

mother of penury, and never finds what it seeks (2.23). He invites Alexander
to join him as a pupil in the life of renunciation, sustained by Providence

pronoia ); he extols the benefits of his own life, being able to foretell the
(
works of God and to intercede with God’s Providence (2.24—25). Killing
criticised and contrasted with the life of pacifism and tranquillity: ultimately Alexander cannot avoid God’s justice, however aggressive he might
is

be. He is told to live the life allotted him by God rather than killing others,
which is presented as greed. (2.26-30). The speech ends with the promise

that Alexander’s failure to obey will be met with punishment, at a future

time when his success in war will not help him (2.30).

134

The unusual — KpaT— of the name is transmitted in the majority of the manuscripts, and is matched
by a corresponding -a- in the Latin.

Wisdom

281

Alexander is both struck and pleased by what he hears, ‘for there was in
fact a divine spirit in him but one which had, by an evil demon, been per-

verted into murder’ (2.31). He salutes Dandamis for his greatness, beyond

what Calanus had led him to expect; struck by the blessings of the tranquil life, he contrasts his own life of fear, especially at night-time, even
of his friends (2.32—33). In practice, though, he cannot repudiate his own
actions, and would in any case be prevented by his soldiers from living in

the wilderness (2.34). To honour Dandamis he orders slaves to bring gifts
of gold and silver coins, of clothing, bread and oil, for ‘it is a good deed to

honour wisdom .' 35 Dandamis refuses the gifts, inveighs against luxurious
living, for he feeds on air and the water of the river, and all his needs are

supplied by God. But he does accept the oil, ‘in order not to dishonour

one honouring wisdom’, pours it on a pile of wood, sets it alight and prays
to God (2.37-39).

Alexander, moved by these ‘wise and true words’, takes back the gifts
refused, whereupon Dandamis launches on a further exposition of his doc-

of the work is taken up with a further
speech of Dandamis, much of it echoing earlier sound-bytes, much of it
trine (2.41-57). In fact the rest

contrasting Brahmans with Macedonians and Greeks. Calanus is criticised
for learning Brahmans’ secrets under false pretences, only to abscond to the

Greeks: it is he who has instigated Alexander’s killing of Brahmans, despite
their peacefulness and lack of materialism (2.41-42).

Much is said about

eating and appetites, now in terms of slavery and freedom (2.44); this leads
to attacks on the eating of meat, and also on the drinking of wine and on

castration (2.45, 47—48, 54). Epicurean, Stoic and Peripatetic philosophers
are all scorned, the first two for their effeminacy and their desire for money

respectively (2.53). Dandamis ends his speech by saying that the Brahmans

pity the Macedonians, and indeed all of humankind, and will play no part
in the hostilities that beset them; again he offers Alexander the possibility

of staying with them in the wilderness, following a peaceful life, imitating

God (2.55—57). ft is on this note that the work ends.
Self-evidently, the story shows many of the features sketched earlier in
this chapter: for example, they speak in paradoxes, their gestures are accen-

tuated, their social position marginal. There are so many of these features in

evidence in this text that we may regard its main characters, the Brahmans,
as figures of wisdom. Let us consider some aspects of this in greater detail.

135

Jyco yap EUEpyEToOpai aocpav Tipcov (2.35-36).

Contexts ofa discourse

282

Significantly, they do not themselves travel,

136

but they are the objects of

religious travel.

In general, the story may be said to represent an element present in the

other Alexander histories: Alexander’s pothos. The very fact of Alexander’s
presence at the edges of the earth shows this. In fact, the drama implicit
in this confrontation over the nature of knowledge is heightened for its

being at the same time a cross-cultural encounter. The tendency to think

of the conqueror in moralistic terms is of course not new, and apparent
in Plutarch’s rhetorical treatise

On the fortune ofAlexander. This may be

regarded as typical of the ancient habit of focusing on the personality of a
‘great man’.

137

There is in fact a contradiction in the presentation of Alexander here. On
the one hand, he is supreme representative of the world, and particularly of

and lusts. As we have seen, he is the figure of worldly authority, 138
the sounding board against which the Brahmans can advertise themselves.
At stake here is nothing less than the question about the nature of true
its desires

knowledge: the worldly or geographical knowledge of Alexander, with its
implicit proximity to power (e.g., 2.21), is contrasted with knowledge of

the divinity. On the other hand, his own search for the Brahmans is in itself
a search for wisdom (e.g., 2.39). The scholarly side of Alexander is brought

out more clearly in the western medieval tradition. 139
In its basic outline the story-pattern is a familiar one from the realm

of folklore: a sage’s encounter with a king, whom he outwits. 140 But it is

more than that. Much of the first part reads like an ancient novel: the
almost picaresque story of travel, capture and release, and there is some
complexity of narrative frames. A rationalising element is seen, for example, at 1. 13 on the procreative habits of the Brahmans, as if in answer to
the question, how else would their tribe increase? (The issue is complicated by the hostility to marriage exhibited in the work, a feature that has
136

Except, perhaps, in so far as Calanus accompanies Alexander’s retinue up till his spectacular death.

This occurs not here but in other versions, notably Arrian Anab. 7.2—3. This is presented not as

137

travel in search of wisdom but as a result of his loss of self-control and consequent estrangement
from the Brahmans.
For Alexander as a prime target of the Cynic project of subverting authority, see Anthony A. Long,
‘The Socratic tradition: Diogenes, Crates and hellenistic ethics’, in The Cynics ed. Branham and
Goulet-Caz£, pp. 28-46, at pp. 29 and 35 n. 20: ‘Even if the encounters between Diogenes and
Alexander the Great are spurious, they became the favourite Cynic illustration of ethical opposition
,

to political kingship.’
138

On Alexander (like Plato) as a figure of authority against which Cynics react, see The Cynics ed.
,

Branham and Goulet-Caz6.
139

See Chapter 5, section 1 6

140

E.g., Stoneman, ‘Naked philosophers’, 114, adduces the Life ofAesop and the Jewish stories of Esther

.

.

and Daniel, among others.

Wisdom

283

been taken to betray Gnostic links.) The presence in the text of learned
digressions is also in keeping with the Greek novel, if one compares, say,

Heliodorus’ excursus on the hippopotamus, and indeed Philostratus’ Life of
Apollonius ,' 4

'

On the other hand, the second part is characterised by maxims or gnomai
of a moralising nature. Much space is devoted to the arguments in favour
of vegetarianism. 142 This is merely one of several ways in which accepted
social practices are questioned, in a manner and tone reminiscent of the

Cynic diatribe. We have seen earlier in this chapter the tendency, common
to Greco-Roman and several other cultures, to give maxims or paradoxes a
special status as rhetorical units of wisdom.

The language of gesture as it occurs in this story accentuates difference
in both social status and in worldview: it is no coincidence that Alexander
is

standing while they are lying on the ground.' 43 We might sense here an

implicit comparison with the striding of a commander in the Iliad, eager
to assert himself on the battlefield.' 44 More specifically, the presentation of
this

episode in the Alexander romance invites comparison with the ritual

prostration (proskynesis) required by Persian kings and, controversially, in

327 bc by Alexander himself.' 45 The gesture is spoken of by Aristotle as a
specifically barbarian mark of honour ( Rhetorica 136^36).
It

has been pointed out, in a cultural history of ancient gesture, that

sitting or lying on the ground is part of a complex of gestures which all
aim at a total self-abasement of the subject’;' 46 and that ‘[t]he presentation

of the self in public
was often acted out according to the contrast
of high (upright carriage) and low (sitting, prostration)’; in the process
.

.

.

hierarchies of prosperity and power were enacted.' 47

The Brahmans are

then very notable for the extent of their self-abasement.

That this self-abasement should not be taken for obeisance towards
authority is made clear in the response of the Brahmans to Alexander.
This is reminiscent of Diogenes the Cynic’s famous response to Alexander’s

question of what he desired from him: ‘Get out of my sunlight.’ 148 In so far
as body-language defies the norms of social hierarchy, Palladius’ Brahmans

can very easily have been taken for Cynic sages.
141

Shadi Bartsch, Decoding the ancient novel (Princeton University Press, 1989).

142

Stoneman, ‘Brahmans’, 504-9.

143

On gesture as a central aspect of self-presentation in Roman society which places such a high
premium on public rhetoric, see, e.g., Cox, Biography xi; Brown, Power and persuasion
Maud Gleason, Making men (Princeton University Press, 1995).
,

,

p.

144

Bremmer, ‘Walking, standing’, pp. 16-17.

145

Bosworth, Conquest and empire pp. 284-7, narrates the crisis this sparked in Alexander’s camp.
,

146

Bremmer, ‘Walking, standing’, p. 26.

147

Bremmer, ibid.

148

Arr. Anab. 7.2.1.

57;

Contexts ofa discourse

284

The emphasis placed in the tale of Calanus on suicide by fire has invited
several scholars to seek parallels in Indian society, but such attempts have

borne little fruit. For example, in Jain asceticism starvation rather than fire
is the preferred

method of suicide 149 It appears, at any rate, that this form of
.

suicide elicited two different lines of response. First, there were those who

admired the control of the self it expressed, hence the many references to the
fact that Calanus went calmly into the fire without protesting or flinching,
as, for example,

we saw in Philo above. On the other hand, the calculated

exhibitionism involved could cause irritation, as it does in the case of the
(admittedly fictional) speaker of Lucian’s On the death of Peregrinus. We

should bear in mind that for Greeks and Romans self-immolation was
never regarded as an acceptable form of death, and remained a marker of
foreignness 150
.

Perhaps the most important figure for us to notice is the Brahmans’
distance from

human culture, their marginality, already touched on in

connection with Tertullian and Augustine. In fact, ‘India’ is in this text the

shorthand expression for the wilderness ( eremia) of that region, which is
set up as a utopia, at the expense of ‘the world’ as represented by Alexander.

Dandamis

.

.

was lying among the woods, resting peacefully on leaves, close by a

.

spring from which he drank as if milking the breast of mother earth 151
.

As Dandamis is reported to say later, ‘in the wilderness, the soul is tempted
towards virtue ’.' 52 This utopian vision relies heavily on the idea of nature
as a refuge from human culture, which comes across as the activities of
money-seeking, warfare, meat-eating and the drinking of alcohol - all of
which come under the rubric of desire. Underlying this is a view of nature as

radically distanced from culture. Whereas other holy persons, for example
in Syria and Egypt, assumed positions which were marginal to their own
societies, ‘India’ here emerges as being itself marginal to the Greco-Roman

world embodied in Alexander. This may be considered a geographical variant on the theme of social marginality that we noticed in the case of the
Christian holy person.

Stepping back a moment from these features of the story, what are we
to make of its curious textual history? The authorship of Palladius is now

149

Stoneman, ‘Brahmans’, 505—6.

150

Anton J. L. van Hooff, From autothanasia to suicide (London: Routledge, 1990), pp. 57-9.
AavSapiis
ev uAr| avaKEiTai etti c|)uAAois lapivois eyyus ex 001 Tnyy^v cos pa^ov oncepaiov

151

.

.

.

aiaeAycov MTjTpos (2.12).
152

nEipa^ETai yap eis apET-pv ev ipripipc cpuyil (2.28).

'

Wisdom

285

generally accepted, 153 the first part being the safer bet. 154 It is easy to see

how part of the work can have got caught up in Alexander legends.

155

It was

written by Palladius of Helenopolis (b. 363/364), who served as bishop first
in Bithynia (c. 400—406) and later in his native Galatia (c. 412-0 431). His

support for John Chrysostom earned him exile from Bithynia in 406, as
well as suspicion of sympathy towards Origenism; after being expelled from

Bithynia he travelled within Egypt before assuming his new see. The Lausiac
history

,

which he composed around 419, remains, along with Athanasius’

Life ofAnthony a key witness to early Egyptian monasticism. His treatise
,

‘On the life of the Brahmans’ gained currency in the west through its
translation into Latin

by Pseudo-Ambrose.' 56 A textual tradition in the

east nearly matching that of the Alexander romance for complexity is an

indication of its widespread popularity. It was in Egypt that the Romance
was much read, and it is probably here that the text was composed.
If,

then, we can safely assume authenticity, it is intriguing to consider the

work alongside two other aspects of its author’s life. First, what connections
can be drawn between this work and the more famous Lausiac history (which
does not mention it, or in fact Brahmans at all)? Certainly the first-person
narration of the first section of the life of the Brahmans can be paralleled
in the Lausiac history, where he makes constant reference to his own travels
in Egypt. It can be no coincidence that, at a time when Christian ascetic
theory and practice reached new heights in the Mediterranean world, Indian
ascetics should have attracted attention.

Even if the monastic movement
had by the early fifth century spread well beyond its Egyptian desert origins
(witness Syria), then Anthony’s Egypt continued its exemplary status. If it
could be shown that Brahmans too participated in the world of ascetic
piety,

then their spectacular achievements would redound to the glory

of Christian asceticism. In this way, the Brahmans, already familiar from
stories about Alexander, would offer Christians some exotic and eminent

comrades.

153

The arguments of E R. Coleman-Norton, ‘The authorship of the Epistola de Indicis gentibus et
de Bragmanibus

,

Cl Phil. 21 (1926), pp. 154—60, still hold firm, however tenuous his grounds

for claiming that Palladius himself travelled to the east (itself perhaps another instance

of the

‘biographical fallacy’ noted above in connection with the Greek lyric poets). More recent scholarship

on the subject heavily favours Palladian authorship: J. D. M. Derrett, ‘The history of “Palladius
on the races of India and the Brahmans’”
21 (i960), 64-35; Beverley Berg, ‘The letter of
Palladius on India’, Byzantion 44 (1974), pp. 5-16; Wilhelm Berghoff, Palladius, de gentibus Indiae

C&M

Bragmanibus (Meisenheim: Hain, 1967); Richard Stoneman, Legends of Alexander the Great
(London: Everyman, 1994).

et

154

For discussion see Derrett, ‘Palladius’, 64-135.

155

Partly because it narrates the journey of an Egyptian scholar: Berg, ‘Letter of Palladius’, 5-16.

156

Latin tr. ed. Berghoff, Palladius.

.

286

Contexts ofa discourse

This line of interpretation gains strength if we take into account Jerome’s
claim of Palladius’ complicity with the Origenist controversy. The notion
that

all

people, not merely Christians,

would be saved effectively gives

greater room for the Brahmans within Christian thought: at the very least,

Origenism redirects emphasis from conversion to the ascetic ideal itself. In
the light of Origenism it is easy to see why the Brahmans could, in such a

brand of Christianity gain sanctity by their ascetic achievements, and could
in so doing effectively become a non-Christian holy people. 157

III.}.

Christians and Cynics

The Cynic connection has already been brought out in earlier scholarship. 158
This is an important line of inquiry, and one that gains huge importance if

we remember that, as we have seen, Arrian, for one, speaks of Calanus and
Diogenes in the same breath Anab 7.2-3). 159 We should not forget that
the earliest Greek name associated with the interview, apart from Alexander
himself, is Onesicritus, whom we know to have been a pupil of Diogenes
of Sinope. 160 But if we consider the authorship of the work we must be
mindful also of a different context, that of Christian asceticism. The main
question we have to consider is, what is it about the Brahmans that appealed
(

to Christians?

To be sure, the work has many features in common with Christian asceticism. But the problem comes when similar features are identified in other

brands of ascetic behaviour. Thus we have the conquest of inner warfare
(reminiscent of Anthony’s fight with his own sexuality, presented in Athanasius’ vita in very physical terms),'

61

submission to the divine, renunciation

of the world. But then, as a recent collection richly illustrates,'

62

there are

non-Christian traditions of renunciation too.
157

However, Berg, ‘Letter of Palladius’, sees the text as Gnostic with Encratite elements; Penelope
Photiad&s, ‘Les diatribes cyniques du papyrus de Geneve 271, leurs traductions et elaborations
successives’,

158

MH16 (1959), 116-39, csp- 12.6, as Arrian.

E.g. Victor Martin, ‘Un recueil de diatribes cyniques Pap. Genev. inv. 271’,

MH 16 (1959), 77-115.

Stoneman, ‘Brahmans’, takes this further with a valuable critique of earlier analyses, but see also
Willis and Maresch, ‘Encounter of Alexander’, concerning recently found papyrus fragments.
159

Diog. Laert. (6.76, 79) tells us that Diogenes the Cynic died the same day as Alexander, at the age of
eighty, that is on 13 June 323. Such a coincidence must be regarded as improbable, and it might be

best to interpret the story as expressing a pointed juxtaposition between authority and subversion:

Long, ‘Socratic tradition’, in The Cynics ed. Branham and Goulet-Caz6, pp. 28-46, at 45. While
,

the historical arguments for Alexander’s meeting with the Brahmans are stronger, we must here too

make provision for pointed exaggeration.
160

Brown, Onesicritus and Pearson, Lost histories.
161
Peter Brown, The body and society (New York: Columbia University Press, 1988).
162
Vincent L. Wimbush and Richard Valantasis, (eds.) Asceticism (Oxford: Clarendon, 1995).
;

Wisdom

287

Why should Christians have taken an interest in the Brahmans? It is after
all

a bishop of Caesarea, Eusebius (

PE 11.3), who tells the story of a visit

paid to Socrates by an Indian, following Aristotle’s pupil Aristoxenus. 163 For

Clement, barbarian wisdom in general ‘becomes a means of criticizing the

Greek confidence in human reason, the uniqueness of the Hellenic tradition, and their proud proclamation of philosophy and theory’; 164 as such, it
was part of the idea of ‘original wisdom’ invoked against Greek philosophy
in its rationalising mould. These cases, taken alongside Palladius’ text, show

us that the Brahmans, by their very lack of paideia, offered Christians like

Clement unexpected allies, and a way of chipping away at the imposing
edifice of polytheist philosophy.

Various scholars have grappled with a possible connection between this

work and Cynic philosophy. 165 Is it possible that this story was a folktale
circulating in Alexandria’s philosophical milieu? Certainly, as

Chapter 3

shows, it is true that trade activity did bring Indian merchants to Alexandria, and Greeks and Romans to the Indian subcontinent. So it is a priori

likely that Alexandria, as a major international centre with not only reg-

ular trade activity but also a scholarly hubbub since the third century

bc, would have been a place where such stories could be exchanged. But

we must guard here against too readily speaking about ‘folktale’, when
this obviates the

need to think about points of contact with the ‘real’

world.

A more profitable way to interpret this material

is

one which makes

us recognise the prominence and changing fortunes of holy men and of

Cynic sages; and, further, explore features those holy men shared with
other types of sages, such as wandering Cynics and even Brahmans. 166 It
in the sphere of perceptions that we must seek the possibility of overlap
between holy men and Cynics of the Mediterranean world on the one hand,
is

and the Brahmans of India on the other. There is no underestimating the
significance of contemporary perceptions of such people.

The room for

slippage within such perceptions is attested in an important study of Jesus’

contemporary reception. 167
163
165

See section II.i above.

,S4

Halbfass, India and Europe p. 9.
,

Beverley Berg, ‘Dandamis: an early Christian portrait of Indian ascetism’,

C&M 1970

(31),

269-

305, has seen Dandamis as an entirely Cynic figure; more moderately, Stoneman in ‘Brahmans’ and

‘Naked philosophers’ agrees in essence but looks to earlier roots, e.g. Hdt. 3.100 on the non-violence
of the Indians. Brown, Onesicritus has argued both that Cynic doctrine originates in India and that
,

166

Dandamis is a projection of the Cynic - seemingly contradictory positions.
This is already to some extent implicit in Reitzenstein’s study on wonder-working, though Brahmans
themselves do not come under the spotlight: Hellenistische Wundererzahlungen.

167

Morton Smith, Jesus the magician (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978), focusing on exorcism,
‘nature miracles’ and healing; cf. Fogen, Enteignung, pp. 189-92.

,

Contexts ofa discourse

288

This apparent confluence of elements brings us to a problem of analysis

which we may term comparative asceticism. There is in general the risk
of overinterpreting similarities of ascetic practice that may not necessarily
be related; in fact there are many other ascetic practices throughout the
world, and the same features tend to recur, such as mortification of
the flesh and vegetarianism. Yet it would seem worthwhile here to consider the possibility that all three had some effect on each other. Similarities

between Christians and Cynics were asserted by Lucian and Aelius

Aristides,’

68

and much of the recent research on the historical Jesus, at

least in the eyes of contemporaries, as a Cynic sage.’

69

Certainly, Dandamis

exhibits many of the features of Diogenes of Sinope in Diogenes Laertius’
Vita.

There too we must be conscious of projection, given the time-lag

of some 500 years between them; and Cynicism had had a varied career

by the time Diogenes Laertius was writing.’ 70 After having low prestige it
gained greatly when in the high empire the Stoics claimed them as their
philosophical ancestors; qua philosophers they were to get the approval of
Julian the Apostate, who nonetheless criticises their exhibitionism.' 7
It is also true that neither

’

Dandamis nor Diogenes of Sinope exhibit all

the features of the holy man, especially his functions as arbitrator in nonreligious contexts; but both share his histrionics (particularly in the Syrian

version), and his place on society’s margins. If holy people such as Symeon

the Stylite appeared in the Byzantine world at a time of Christianisation,’ 72

then it would not seem unfair to see the Brahman (or for that matter the

Cynic sage) as answers to the same area of religious need - all of this in a
period of heightened religious conflict.

IV.

THE DIFFUSION OF PA I DEI A: APOLLONIUS OF TYANA

We turn now to the testimony of Indian holiness given by the writer of a very
different text: the life of Apollonius of Tyana by Philostratus, composed

probably around ad 222-35. 173
168
169
171

I

n rhe most obvious sense, Philostratus’

Derek Krueger, ‘The bawdy and society’, in The Cynics ed. Branham and Goulet-Caze, pp. 222—39.
170
Smith, Jesus.
Branham and Goulet-Caz£, The Cynics, introduction.
Or. 6, to the uneducated Cynics’; elsewhere (esp. or. 7) Julian tries to breathe new life into the

Cynic movement, and to show the unity of their philosophy. At issue in both, to an extent, is their
degree of paideia. Like several contemporaries, Julian reveals admiration for the ‘classical’ Cynicism
of Diogenes while attacking theit contemporary followers as charlatans: G. W. Bowersock, Julian
the Apostate (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978), pp. 81-2; Athanassiadi, Julian and

Hellenism, pp. 128-31.
172

Derek Krueger, Symeon the holy fool (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996).

173

Eisner, ‘Hagiographic geography’, 22, following E. L. Bowie, ‘Apollonius of Tyana: tradition and
reality’,

ANRWU.16.Z (1978), 1652-99.

Wisdom
life

289

of Apollonius exhibits the same features that we have already seen.

His eastward journey has the form, at first glance at least, of a pilgrimage to the wise teachers of ancient societies, inviting comparison with

Herodotus’ visit to the Egyptian priests, and it is in this light that we see
the Brahmans (note esp.
article,

Eisner has

1.2). Yet, as

made clear in a recent

the hagiography harbours different modalities of travel:

on this

score alone, its complexities are considerable. In the course of this discussion, we shall

have to consider the judgement that ‘Philostratus presents

Pythagoras as a recipient and transmitter of Egyptian and, ultimately, Indian

wisdom’. 174

Most of what we know about Apollonius comes, in fact, from Philostratus, a fact that brings difficulties if we are searching for the historical

Apollonius, given the nature of Philostratus’ own agenda, as we are able to
reconstruct it from his other works. The work itself is more hagiography

than biography. 175 To complicate matters, when Apollonius attracts interest
again in the fourth century, it is in a highly polemical context: at issue is
the comparison of him with Christ. This topic is brought out polemically
in Eusebius’ Against Hierocles, at a time when the debate over Apollonius

heated up amidst conflict between polytheists and Christians. 176 But, before

we concern ourselves with the complexities of Apollonius’ story, let us first
outline the Indian leg of his travels, as told by Philostratus. 177

Having remained twenty months at the court of the Parthian king Bardanes or Vardanes at Babylon, Apollonius sets out with Damis and some
other servants.

He has received from his host the necessary camels and

guide. They cross the Hindu Kush and reach the Indus.

Here they are

amicably received by the local satrap, who heeds Vardanes’ letter of introduction and aids their river-crossing. This satrap intercedes with his own
king, who rules the land between the Indus and the Hydraotes (Ravi), for

174

Halbfass, India and Europe p. 9.
,

176

175

Edwards in Portraits ed. Edwards and Swain, p. 233.
,

Eusebius’ authorship has been impugned by Tomas Hagg, ‘Hierocles the lover of truth and Eusebius the Sophist’, SO 67 (1992), 138-50. Contra

:

Timothy D. Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius

(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981), pp. 164-7, who dates its composition to shortly
before 303. What is more, the VA shows certain parallels to Christian hagiography, and these may in
fact betray influences from Christian texts: Smith, Jesus the magician pp. 84-93; Swain in Portraits ,
,

ed. Edwards and Swain, p. 28.
177

For an older generation of scholarship concerned primarily with the historicity of the journey, see
the analysis of Vincent A. Smith, ‘The Indian travels of Apollonius of Tyana’,

ZDMG 68 (1914),

329-44, with ample reference to earlier work; cf. Christopher P. Jones, ‘Apollonius of Tyana’s passage
to India’, GRBS 42 (2001), 185-99. It is striking that Eusebius never denies that Apollonius visited
India, though he does ridicule the travellers’ tales he brings back. More specifically, the historicity

of Apollonius’ companion Damis has been doubted by Barnes, Constantine and Eusebius
Bowie, Apollonius’, sees him as an invention of Philostratus.

,

p. 166;

290

Contexts ofa discourse

Having crossed the Indus, they reach Taxila, 178 where they
are received for three days by an Indian philosopher-king, known by the
safe passage.

Parthian name of Phraotes (2.19—20). Their lengthy conversations span various topics, including the nature of philosophical training, of rulership, and

Apollonius advises the king on a legal dispute (2.39). From here the travellers set out to find the Indian sages, taking with them fresh camels and a

letter of introduction from the king.

Two days from Taxila they come upon

the battlefield where Alexander defeated Porus. They cross the Hydraotes

and then the Hyphasis. Still thirty stadia from the Hyphasis they catch
sight of monuments marking the limit of Alexander’s expedition (2.43).

They then cross that part of the Hindu Kush which stretches down to
the Arabian Sea, coming to a plain irrigated by channels from the Ganges.

Here they hunt dragons. Having heard of a great city called Parax or Paraka,
situated at the foot of an unspecified mountain, they proceed for four days

through fertile countryside until they arrive at the castle of the sages, placed
atop a hill.

Here Apollonius stays for four months as a guest of the philosophers,
with whom he converses regularly in Greek. 179 Among others, he meets
Iarchas, chief of the sages. Supplied again with a guide and fresh camels

he travels for ten days before reaching the sea. 180 He reaches an unnamed
port where passenger ships lay at anchor, and sends the camels home with
a letter addressed to Iarchas. He embarks one of the ships, encouraged by
a gentle breeze; but soon sailing conditions become much less favourable
at the mouth of the Hyphasis.

He sails past the mouth of the Indus, along

the Makran to the mouth of the Euphrates, following the route taken by

Nearchus (3.53). He returns to Babylon and visits king Vardanes. From
there he travels by land to Seleucia via Nineveh, then by ship to Cyprus,

and thence to Ionia. (Book four is devoted to his travels in Ionia, the Greek
mainland and Italy.)
Apollonius’ own status as a sage is assured at the start by his own stated
search for wisdom: such is his piety that he exceeds Pythagoras in sophia

178

Though there might be archaeological evidence for Taxila as a 'university city’ (Smith, ‘Indian
travels’, 336), this diagnosis cannot be made of Philostratus’ chapter: the grandeur of the royal

179

We may note that, in keeping with the ancient (mosdy historiographic) discourse on autopsy,

palace includes Greek reliefs, and the city is compared with Nineveh, but it would be going too far
to speak of this as a site of Greek paideia in the text: Dani, Taxila.

Philostratus actually meets the Brahmans in person. Just as Onesicritus is an intermediary in the

Alexander histories, so the Indian messenger fulfils that function here.
180

Philostratus claims at this point that he kept the Ganges on his right and the Hyphasis on his left,
a geographical possibility.

Wisdom

291

This search for wisdom is explained by the author as a series of

(1.2).

interviews with the Babylonian Magi, Indian Brahmans and Egyptian Gymnosophists. At the same time, as the author concedes, these very visits made

him subject to accusations of quackery, accusations which Philostratus is
at pains to counter from the outset. Some praised him, but for others these
visits were grounds for suspicion:

Because he was in contact with the wizards of Babylon, the Brahmans of India, and
the naked philosophers of Egypt, some dismissed him as a charlatan, and alleged
that he was a wizard, passing a negative judgment on him. (1.2)

181

Again we see the fragility of wisdom: journeys of the kind that conferred

wisdom on the Seven Sages are the very ones that elicit criti-

cisms of Apollonius’ quackery. Philostratus’ defends Apollonius by comparing him with Empedocles, Pythagoras and Democritus,

who spoke

with Magians though themselves never resorted to magic. Even Plato,

whose reputation for wisdom is beyond reproach, visited Egypt to speak
with its prophets and priests. And so Philostratus’ apologia continues.
Philostratus does not suggest that the eastern sages are in themselves

dubious: at issue is the acceptability of consorting with them on the part

of Greeks. The polemical note of these comments is matched by many of
the earliest references to Apollonius, on the part of both Christians and
polytheists.

182

One feature that marks this text from other ancient ethnographies is the
attention given to language.

A striking case comes at 3.12, when Apollonius

meets the Brahmans’ messenger. ‘He ran up to Apollonius and spoke to

him in Greek. In itself this did not seem remarkable, for the inhabitants
of the village spoke Greek.’ 183 The surprise comes when the messenger
addresses the visitors by name. For Apollonius, this is a sign of the Indians’

foreknowledge and hence their ‘true wisdom’, and as such marks the success

of their journey. This he says to Damis:

‘We have reached men,’ he said, ‘who are absolutely wise, for they seem to have
the gift of premonition.’ (3.12)

181

oi

Se,

etteiSt]

184

n&yois Ba|3uAcovicov Kai

’lv8cov

Bpaxpacn Kai toIs ev AiyuiTTu rupvois

CTUvsyevsTo, nayov TjyoOvTai auTov Kai 8ia(3aAAouaiv cos (3iaicos cro<f)6v, kokcos ylyvcbaKOVTgs•
182

See the testimonia collected by G. Petzke, The Traditionen iiber Apollonius von Tyana und das Neue

183

TtpoaSpapovTa 8 e tco AttoAAgovigo <f>covrj 'EAAaSi TTpoaeiireiv auTov, Kai toOto pev outtco
Qaupacrrov 8o£ai 81a to Kai tous ev Trj kcopt] travTas caro TEA Arivcov 0 £yy£a 0 ai.

184

uapa av8pas, £<J>r|, ao<f>ous aTEyvcos f|Kop£v, EoiKaai yap TtpoyiyvcboKEiv.

Testament (Leiden: Brill, 1970), pp. 19-45.

<j>

Contexts ofa discourse

292.

The emphasis on Greek language as a cultural index may be regarded as
typical

of the work as a whole. 185

It is

part of Philostratus’ particularly

Hellenising view of India.
It is

already clear that Philostratus’ India emphasises the diffusion of

paideia. Beyond this, if we ask what role it plays in the text, two answers

can be given. The first, more obvious, one involves travel as a source of
authority.

It

is

his

journey to India that empowers Apollonius, from a

certain point of view, to confront the Roman emperors. His two very different interviews with the Indian kings prepare the way for those with

two Roman emperors, namely Vespasian at Alexandria (5.27-38) and particularly Domitian at Rome (7.32-33 and 8.1-5). The last of these is in
the form of a legal trial, from which Apollonius is acquitted and departs
miraculously. There are important differences between the Indian rulers,
differences whose significance becomes even more apparent in hindsight.
On the one hand, the philosopher-king Phraotes, advocates the simple

life

free

(2.25-29);

of war,

as well as vegetarianism,

he tells of strict rules

restricting

and speaks fluent Greek

admission to the status of

(2.30). On the other, the unnamed Indian king dismisses
philosophy as foolishness and is contemptuous of the Greeks generally

philosopher

(3.28—29). Though Apollonius successfully refutes the king’s insult of the
Greeks as ‘slaves’, he refuses his invitation. This second king in his boastful-

ness comes close to Aristotle’s idea that India contains despots, and contrasts

with the philosopher-king. 186 Later in the hagiography, Apollonius clashes
with both Nero and Domitian, whereas Vespasian seeks his guidance. The
difference between these two models of rulership has already emerged in
India.

Even if the second king’s comments on the Greeks reflect badly on
himself, India in this work is nonetheless the place that makes critique possible.

The philosopher Iarchus criticises the Greeks as hypocritical in their

lip-service to justice ( dikaiosune, 3.25). In his encounters with the Roman

emperors, it is Apollonius’ travels that make it possible for him to speak
truth to power; in so far as this is especially true of the Indian leg of his
185

Apollonius’ impeccable Greek is without any tinge of a Cappadocian accent (1.7). See the discussion

of Flinterman, Power, paideia pp. 90—100. In general, on the role of language in the construction of
,

Hellenic culture (though focusing on an earlier period and on differences between Greek groups),
see Hall, Ethnic identity and HelLenicity.
186

The unnamed king’s accusation that the Greeks were the ‘slaves of Xerxes’ resonates with Aristotle’s
comment on Indian despotism, which he attributes to Scylax: cf. Chapter 1, section I.i above. This
view contrasts with Aristotle’s positive image of the philosopher-king: Malcolm Schofield, Saving
the city: philosopher-kings and other classical paradigms (London: Routledge, 1999).

Wisdom
journey,

293

by implication India itself is the space of critique. This is true

of India in a way that does not apply to Egypt, that part of Apollonius’
journey described in book 6. Apollonius’ lengthy speech in his own defence
against Domitian’s accusations contains praise of Indian philosophers, distinguished from Egyptian, as his teachers (8.7).

Second, less obviously but no less significantly, India invokes the memory

of Alexander in a particular way. References to Alexander are relatively few,
yet he is a profound presence in the text, not only by means of his own
itinerary but also that

of his general Nearchus (2.17 and 3.53). What is

more, India’s sacred geography is mapped in relation to Dionysus and
Heracles, themselves linked with Alexander’s expedition. The invocation

of Alexander is no simple matter, and is certainly not adulatory in an
uncomplicated way; rather, it contains a strong sense of revisionism. Thus
the party visits the shrine of Dionysus at Mount Nysa (2.9). In describing
this episode, Philostratus enters into discussion about whether Alexander

did in fact ascend or whether, according to local tradition, he refrained from

doing so in order to spare his troops the temptations of grapes available
there. The tone of the chapter is defensive, as if Philostratus is aware of
controversy on the subject. In this way Alexander is the subject of ongoing
debate.

By the same token, the travellers’ refusal to visit Mount Aornus

shows both awareness of the campaign and a willingness to diverge from
its path (2.10).

The memory of Alexander lives also in relation to monuments. His
combat with Porus is commemorated in several ways in book 2. One
of Porus s elephants, by the name of Ajax, still lives at Taxila. Enjoying
celebrity status well into its fourth century of life, it wore golden rings on
tusks, to which Alexander had added a dedicatory inscription to the
Sun (2.12). The temple of the Sun was adorned with golden images of

its

Alexander, whereas those of Porus were of black bronze (2.24, cf. 2.20).

Such references to Porus emphasise his subjugation to Alexander, and one
even suggests affectionate loyalty (2.20—21). The most remarkable monument to Alexander comes, however, at the point where Apollonius and
his party cross the river Hyphasis, and thus proceed farther into India than

Alexander’s troops had allowed. Near the river they found altars inscribed as
follows:

‘To father Ammon and his brother Heracles and Athena Pronoia and Olympian
Zeus and the Kabeiri of Samothrace and the Indian Sun and Apollo of Delphi.’

They say that a bronze stele was also dedicated, and on it was inscribed: ‘Alexander
reached this point.’ We may imagine that the altars were the work of Alexander,

Contexts ofa discourse

294

who thus acknowledged the extent of his empire, but I suspect, on the other hand,
that the stele was put up by the Indians beyond the Hyphasis, so as to express their

pride that Alexander had gone no farther. (2.43) 187

This location is presented as a very distinctive landmark within Philostratus’
cultural geography of Hellenism. Its placing at the end of the second book

merely heightens its impact. The sentiment expressed, containing as it
does a hint of resistance to Alexander, is somewhat at odds with Porus’
adulation of him. Given the nature of Alexander in the text, however, this
is no serious contradiction; it merely points to a variety of responses inspired
by his campaign. Philostratus’ gloss in this extract certainly differs from the
more laudatory responses to Alexander’s campaign.

The possibility of varied responses to Alexander’s campaign is analogous

On the one hand
shows the diffusion of Hellenism, particularly in light of the attention

to the complexity of India itself in the Life ofApollonius.
it

given to the Greek language; on the other, it is also a source of wisdom,

and of authority. In this respect, India in this text, is distinctly superior
to Egypt. It is thus not surprising that Apollonius is both a pilgrim, going
to learn from the Indian sages, and also a teacher. The clearest example of
this is the counsel he gives Phraotes in a legal dispute (2.39). Philostratus,
it is

true, devotes some attention to the topography and natural history of

India. Much of this, however, is highly stylised. It would be more accurate
to say that it occupies a complicated place in Philostratus’ ‘hagiographic

geography’: by virtue of its remoteness, it symbolises the diffusion of Greek
culture, and is thus a place-marker of sorts.

V.

188

MODALITIES OF TRAVEL

Again we are faced with the simple question: what is the geographical area
described by Greeks and Romans as India? Naturally enough, the Brah-

mans of the Alexander histories are a feature of the Indus Valley. Indeed
Alexander’s ‘India’ was very much the Indus Valley. Philostratus’ story of

Apollonius, which can be closely mapped, adheres narrowly to the route

taken by Alexander and, finally, by his officer Nearchus. All of this is unsurprising, in the light of Chapter 1. Indian history, on the other hand, shows
187

FIATPI AMMOINI KAI HPAKAEI AAEAdXAl KAI A0HNAI PIPONOIAI KAI All OAYMTIIWI KAI

ZAMO0PAIHI KABEIPOII KAI INACOI HAICOI KAI AEAOtol ATTOAAtoNI, <t>aai Serai cttt)Xt)v
dvoKEicrGai x^Ak^v, f) £Tnyeypd<})0ai AAEEANAPOI ENTAY0A EITH. tous pev 6f) (3copous
AAe£av6pou T)yGopE0a to Trjs eocutou dpyns TEppa TipcbvTOS, tt^v 8e (TTT|Ar|v tous peTa tov
"Y^aoiv 1v6ous dva0Eivai SoKcbpoi AapTtpuvopEvous etti tco AA£^av8pov pf] npo£A0£iv Tpoaco.
188

On this, more generally, see G. W. Bowersock, Hellenism in late antiquity (Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 1990).

Wisdom

295

us that Brahmans were by no means confined to this region, in that we do

have Sanskrit texts from before the time of Alexander, speaking of Brah-

mans in the Ganges valley. 189 This is the best corroboration we can hope to
find for the Indian king’s comment to Apollonius: Alexander merely spoke
to the warlike Oxydracae tribe, whereas the ‘true sages’

190

live between the

Hyphasis and the Ganges, in territory never reached by Alexander (2.33).
It is here that the

Greco-Roman field of vision shifts eastwards of Alexan-

der’s conquests. Very different still in its setting is the

refers more to the south of the subcontinent.

Thomas story, which

These southern parts came

into the Greco-Roman field of perception only later, as we see in Pliny’s

Natural history and other texts mentioning Roman trade. Though such
trade, famously, had little impact on the formation of a literary image of

India, it had the effect of making possible the kinds of contact that fostered

the diffusion of Christianity.

191

Vi. Pilgrimage into mission

The geographical question of north versus south is thus linked with that
of modalities of travel. To be sure, much has emerged in this chapter to
portray India as a site of pilgrimage, and this relates mostly to the north and

northwest. The paradigm of pilgrimage was set up by Alexander’s interview

with the Brahmans, and underlined by his oft-described reverence toward
them.' 92 Historically, this may be true in retrospect only, i.e. much more the
interpretation of later commentators than part of Alexander’s own actions;

but at all events the paradigm thus created was a strong and enduring
one. 193

It

was reinforced by a number of factors: the antiquity of Indian

civilisation was well

known, and may variously have accounted for and

been strengthened by a tendency to link Brahmans with other eastern

189

By contrast, the Shatapatha Brahmana (Brahmana of the hundred paths), a text of around the
eighth century bc, speaks of Brahmans living in the Gangetic plains, i.e. in the northeast of the

subcontinent: Kulke and Rothermund, History ofIndia, pp. 48-9.
190

oi 6 e crrexvcos ao<f>oi.

191

Dihle, ‘Conception of India’ (= Antike und Orient pp. 89-97, at 9 1 )* has shown that the spread
of Christianity largely matches trade routes of the first and second centuries ad. Note also his
,

192

comment on the different geographical conceptions of India mentioned here, pp. 89—90.
With much continuity up to the present day, parts of India have also been the site of Buddhist
pilgrimage: for a sample of texts reflecting this, including Fa-Hsien, see the collection edited by

Molly Emma Aitken, Meeting the Buddha: on pilgrimage in Buddhist India (New York: Riverhead,
1995). Benares, or the modern Varanasi in the central Gangetic plain, is an example of an urban

centre which has religious rather than specifically political significance.
193

Hahn, ‘The Indian tradition’.

296

Contexts ofa discourse

sages, namely those of Egypt and Babylonia .' 94 Furthermore, in historical

terms Brahmans held a powerful and insular position in Indian society, so
that Indian society may have seemed to Greeks and Romans to support a

strongly institutionalised brand of holiness - one which, more than in their

own societies, explicitly linked holiness and wisdom.
Of the two texts we have considered here at length, Palladius’ On the life
ofthe Brahmans was composed more than two centuries after Philostratus’
Life ofApollonius ofTyana. But the Alexander tradition stretches back much

further into the past (as is shown by the Berlin papyrus), and it is quite
possible that Philostratus in fact knew the Alexander romance, for many

of its features seems to be presumed by the biography, with its greater
sophistication .' 95 Accordingly, the kind of travel we find in Philostratus
is

more complicated than that in Palladius (and indeed elsewhere in the

historical and romance traditions of Alexander).

What is at stake in this kind of religious travel? Travel in itself dramatises
the exchange of cultural capital, as Eisner has shown .' 96 The same could

be said of the recurrent and variable motif of Alexander’s interview with
the Indian philosophers: a confrontation of political authority and social
criticism. This emerges from Palladius and the Alexander romance tradition

even more strongly than the earlier Alexander historians. We have already

noted above that a sense of separation or distance tends to be implicit in
the sacred; one could claim here that this sense is magnified by distance

involved in travel. What is more, if priests in the Greco-Roman world are
in any case a group of people set apart, then Indian priests are that much

more radically set apart. Certainly there is from the fourth century ad a
substantial Christian tradition of travel to a particular holy land, following

Helenas discovery of the True Cross, but we must not forget that there

had already been a strong precedent in Greek religion in the form of travel

194

Ultimately, as we shall discuss in the conclusion, this may have been a factor leading to a totalising

Roman view of ‘the east’.
1,5

Stoneman, ‘Naked philosophers’.

196

Pilgrimage was by no means a Christian invention: Sabine MacCormack, 'Loco, sancta-. the organisation of sacred topography in late antiquity’, in The blessings ofpilgrimage, ed. Robert Ousterhout

(Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1990), pp. 7-40, and R. L. Wilken, The land called holy
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), emphasise polytheist and Jewish precedents respectively.
Matthew Dillon, Pilgrims and pilgrimage in ancient Greece (London: Routledge, 1997), esp. pp. 6098, identifies three types of pilgrim ‘seeking a solution to specific problems’ (60): those visiting an

oracle to secure a god’s approval or advice, those seeking initiation into a mystery cult in the hope of
a better afterlife, and those seeking a cure. Eisner, ‘Hagiographic geography’, in suggesting Christian

paradigms for Apollonius’ ‘pilgrimage’ might have made clearer that Christian pilgrimage, strictly
speaking, did not occur before Helena’s discovery of the True Cross: e.g., Wilken, Land called holy,

pp. 101-25; an<i Hunt, Holy Land pilgrimage, pp. 28-9.

Wisdom
to shrines

297

and oracles, and also in the post-exilic Jewish concept of the

Promised Land.

To what extent do Greco-Roman ideas about India’s holiness begin with
Alexander? Did the earlier Greek travellers visit India as a site of holiness,
in the way that Hegel diagnosed? 197

Not so, in so far as the Achaemenid

context outlined in Chapter 1 was most readily understood in a military

The Brahmans do not feature in any accounts of India preceding
Alexander. Whether or not Alexander actually sought the Brahmans out as
light.

wise people is impossible to say. But it is clear that the post-Platonic period
left

much room for sages untainted with the negative effects of the Sophistic

revolution; other eastern sages, such as Magi or Chaldaeans came into the

breach in a more obvious way than did Brahmans, given that they were
better known to Greeks at this time. But it is clear that the Brahmans were
to some extent viewed in the same light as these other sages, by extension
if nothing else.
It is one thing to speak of modalities of travel per se and another to talk
about India as a destination of such travel. It does seem, from our survey,

that India became such as a destination at a relatively late stage, if we are to

think of pre-Alexander accounts. On the other hand, the principle of travel
to eastern lands is well established from the lawgivers. It appears, however,

that this generally means Mesopotamia and Egypt rather than India. From

Herodotus and Plato alone we see that eastern lands constitute a region
deserving to be visited by those seeking wisdom, but in those authors India

does not get explicitly included.

But pilgrimage on these lines is not the whole story. Another kind of journey exists from much earlier, and considerably complicates the picture. The
travel of Greco-Roman sages involved a degree of teaching also on their own

part - something that essentially reverses the direction of cultural assimilation. It is thus important to emphasise the complexity of Philostratus’ Life

ofApollonius as a text harbouring varied concepts of religious travel.
,

V.2.

Thomas and tradition

Christian texts concerning India show much in common with polytheist
ones, not least in their coverage of the sages. Yet there is a specifically Christian India, in which the subcontinent is a place of mission,
*97

and inspires

‘Without being known too well, it has existed for millennia in the imagination of the Europeans as
a wonderland. Its fame, which it has always had with regard to its treasures, both its natural ones,

and in particular, its wisdom, has lured men there.’ (Hegel, Philosophic der Weltgeschichte quoted
in translation by Halbfass, India and Europe p. 2 )
,

,

.

,

Contexts ofa discourse

298

teaching rather than learning. Embedded within this missionary perspective is a distinction between northern (mostly northwestern) and southern

India, one that reflects different travel routes.
It is the apostle

Thomas that is, at least in the modern period, most widely

considered the first Christian missionary to India 198 Fifteenth-century Por.

tuguese colonial accounts reported Christians on the southern coast who

honoured Thomas as their founder. As early as Gregory of Tours in the fifth
century, some Christians considered Thomas to have been martyred near
Chennai (Madras) 199 By at least the fourth century Thomas was linked with
peninsular India. But, as we shall see, this identification comes relatively
late in the day.

The major source of this tradition is the apocryphal Acts of Thomas. Originally written in Syriac, as now seems likely, in the early third century ad,
it

was translated into Greek at an early date 200 Through these and further
.

translations, into Latin and most other languages of early Christianity, it

became widely diffused in late antiquity. According to this text, the apostles at Jerusalem divide amongst themselves the lands for missionary travel.
Thomas, to whom India falls, is unhappy:

And India fell by lot to Judas Thomas the Apostle. And he was not willing to go,
saying, ‘I have not strength enough for this, because I am weak. And I am a Hebrew:
how can I teach Indians?’ And whilst Judas was reasoning thus, our Lord appeared
to him in a vision of the night, and said to him: ‘Fear not, Thomas, because my
grace is with you.’ But he would not be persuaded at all, saying: ‘Whithersoever
you will, our Lord, send me; only to India I will not go 201
.’

It is

only when, by chance, an Indian merchant comes to Jerusalem that

Judas is sold by Jesus as a slave and a carpenter, and thus goes to India some-

what against his will. This merchant is in the service of king Gudnaphar.

Once in India, he builds a palace for the king; he is imprisoned because he
donates his payment to the poor. The rest of the work consists of a series

of ‘acts’, including the expelling of demons. In its contents the work is
similar to the four other apocryphal Acts. His eventual martyrdom comes
as a result of his success in converting various people,

including the wife

198

Brown, Indian Christians.
199
Gregory of Tours, Glor. mart. 32 [PL 71, 733!]. This continues to be a cult site of Thomas today,
along with another at Kalliene near Mumbai (Bombay). N. J. Thomas, Die syrisch-orthodoxe Kirche
der siidindischen Thomas-Christen (Wurzburg: Augustinus, 1967); still fundamental is A. Mingana,
200

‘The early spread of Christianity in India’, Bulletin of the John Rylands Library 10 (1926), 435-96.
A. F. J. Klijn, The Acts of Thomas: introduction, text, and commentary 2nd edn (Leiden: Brill, 2003),
pp. 3-4 and 8-9, revisited by Jan N. Bremmer, ‘The Acts of Thomas: place, date and women’, in

The apocryphal Acts of Thomas, ed. Jan N. Bremmer (Leuven: Peeters, 2001), pp. 74-90; in what
follows, I am indebted both to Klijn’s edition and Bremmer’s volume.
201

Klijn, Acts of Thomas, p. 17.

Wisdom

299

of an officer of the king. Thomas preaches against marriage which, unless
chaste, is a ‘deed of shame’ (e.g., chs. 14 and 54). The king, having ordered

Thomas’ execution, finally converts to Christianity after the dust from the
apostle’s grave cures his sick son. In the text conversion is expressed in terms

of purity and abstinence from sex. The emphasis on purity and redemption

from corruption has been seen in light of the encratitic strands of eastern
Christianity.

101

Compared with Philostratus’ Life ofApollonius, there is little in this text
that gives topographical specificity to India. However, what is especially
interesting is Thomas’ hesitation to go to India, even though he is otherwise

a willing missionary. The Latin version adds an explanation:

For that region is distant and rough, and the inhabitants of the place are evil and
ignorant of the truth 203
.

The significance of this passage is that it brings the vague Christian missionary idea of India closer to the ethnographies surveyed in Chapter 2. It
is

thus no surprise that it is a Latin translation that adds this detail.

The tradition surrounding the Acts involved overland exchange networks between Mesopotamia and the Persian Gulf, and thus, in its earlier

forms, points

more strongly to the northwest than the south. The

supposedly Indian names found in the text are identifiably Persian, an
indication of northwestern links. The ruler mentioned in the text, Gun-

daphorus, has been identified from coin finds with Parthian dynasts of
the first centuries bc and ad. 104 Thomas’ itinerary from Mesopotamia to
the Indus valley demonstrably coincided with the Persian Gulf sea-route.
In this respect,

Thomas’ India occupies the same geographical space as

Apollonius’.

Though the Acts have become well known over time, they represent
only one strand of missionary history. On the other hand, some earlier
strands of Christian tradition present Bartholomew as the first missionary.

Eusebius reports that Pantaenus, a Stoic philosopher and Clement’s teacher
at Alexandria, was ‘appointed to preach the gospel of Christ to the peoples of

the east, and travelled as far as India’. 105 Having reached the subcontinent,
202
203

Y. Tissot, ‘L’encratisme des Acts de Thomas’,

ANRWW.z^ (1988), pp. 1415-30.

De miraculis beati Thomae apostoli 46.3: regio enim ilia longinqua et grauis est, incolae quoque loci
illius iniqui et ignorantes sunt ueritatem Klaus Zelzer, Die alten lateinischen Thomasakten (Berlin:
Akademie, 1977). An Arabic version goes even further: ‘for they are hard men, like wild beasts, and
:

it will be difficult for them to receive the hearing of the words of the Gospel’ {Preaching of Thomas,
Arabic ed. Smith Lewis, p. 80). Klijn, Acts of Thomas, p. 19, lists examples from the Hebrew bible
,

of rejections of the divine call.
204

Dihle, Antike und Orient pp. 65-8; Raschke, ‘New Studies’, 1368-72.

205

Hist. eccl. 5.10 cos Kai KT)puKa toO Kcrra Xpiarov eOayyeAlou tois ett’ avocToAfjs e0vecjiv ava-

,

SeixOfjvai, psypi Kal TBS ’IvScov crrEiAdiiEvov yfjs; cf. Jer. Ep. 125.3.

300

Contexts ofa discourse

he found that there was already a handful of Christians in situ. This group

owed its origins to the apostle Bartholomew, who on his missionary journey
to India had left behind a copy of Matthew’s gospel written in Hebrew
206
characters.
By contrast to the details of the apocryphal Acts, Eusebius
has Thomas travel to Parthia, where eventually he dies a peaceful death.
For Philostorgios also, writing shortly after ad 400, it was Bartholomew
that brought the gospel to India (Hist. eccl. 18.33). The tradition concerning
Bartholomew involves southern India, and is related to the monsoon route.
Within that framework, a link with Alexandria is unmistakeable in the case
of Pantaenus. It is in this light that we may understand a reference to Indian
religion in an Egyptian papyrus of the second century ad: the mother of

the Buddha is referred to as Isis ( P. Oxy. 1380).

Related to this monsoon connection are the stories of the Indian
Theophilus in the mid-fourth century. Born on the island of Dibus, he

was brought to the court of Constantius II as a hostage and raised there,
he later became a bishop and a counsellor to the emperor and ambassador.
Whether the island of his birth should be identified with the Maldives or
Socotra, it is clear that this figure also is linked with the monsoon route
rather than the Persian Gulf route, and with the southern rather than the
northwestern part of the subcontinent. 207

How, then, can we explain the overlap of these traditions, whereby
Thomas had become associated more with the south than the north of
208
India?
How and why did Thomas come to displace Bartholomew as first
missionary of the south? The change seems to have occurred in the third
century, at a time when there was a clear drop in the monsoon trade. This
was a period when the Roman state underwent economic and political
turmoil, and the early Sassanid rulers extended their power to India via the
Persian Gulf.

It is

thus reasonable to conclude, with Dihle and Van den

Bosch, that by the end of the third century Christians in south India had
stronger ties with the Syrian church of Sassanian Mesopotamia than Egypt

and other parts of the eastern Roman empire. 209

106

207

The language involved no doubt reflects the ancient view, current until recendy, that the Gospel
of Matthew was originally written in Hebrew. See further Jacob Neusner, ‘The Jews east of the
Euphrates’, ANRWl I.9.1 (1978), 46-69.
Gianfranco Fiaccadori, ‘Teofilo Christiano’, SCO 33 (1983), 295-331 and 34 (1984), 271-308; Albrecht
Dihle, ‘Die Sendung des Inders Theophilos’, in Antike und Orient pp. 102-8.
,

208

209

In one fourth-century attempt to align the diverging traditions on this score, Ephraim the Syrian
refers to the moving of the relics from south to north: carm. Nisib. 42.
According to the Chronicle of Seen, David, bishop of Spasinou Charax (Basra) travelled to India

during the years 295 and 300 ( Patrologia Orientals 4.236, 292). Circumstantial evidence suggests
that this was

more likely southern than northern India: Albrecht Dihle, ‘Early Christianity in

Wisdom

301

What these divergent Christian geographies have in common is that
India lies beyond easy reach, and thus represents the ultimate achievement

of mission. For the Syrian tradition, a Parthian locale for Thomas would
not have been far enough, and hence the tendency to associate him, more
impressively, with India.

Vj. Belatedness and extrapolation

A further qualification to an unnecessarily linear model of cultural exchange
is

provided by those Indian sages coming to the Mediterranean world.

Aristoxenus’ story of Socrates’ Indian interlocutor is the obvious instance to

mention here. This story may be without parallel, but it serves as a salutary
reminder of the ways in which modes of religious travel can coexist; and
it

also recalls the varieties of travel on the part of the Greek lawgivers, of

whom some came originally from outside the polis, and others travelled
away from their native poleis before returning.
Greek notice of Indian wisdom may begin with Alexander in so far as
it focuses explicitly on Indian holy men, but it does gel with earlier ideas
about Indian peacefulness (Hdt. 3.100). Brahmans made a big impression
on Greeks and Romans because they represent a coming together of different strands: first, the virtue of distant people, 210 individually personalised
here in the form of Dandamis; and, secondly, the wisdom of sages, especially of ancient eastern peoples, gained and reinforced by their marginal

position relative to the Mediterranean world. They reflect the advantages,

ambiguities and problems of both those elements: on the positive side,

they had the parrhesia of the Christian holy man, and yet they were also

reminiscent of the Cynic sage, who was not an acceptable figure in his own
right.

Perhaps, then, in characterising our eastern sages generally we

must

contrast them with some of their most frequent visitors from the west:

the philosophers. These differed not only by their ethnic identity, but by
their paideia. Gymnosophists and Brahmans bore wisdom, without having

undergone the arduous process of learning, a process which is also important to the making of the Stoic sage, or of late antiquity’s pagan holy man.
It is

in this sense that they offered an alternative kind of wisdom.

India’ in Ancient history ed. Hillard et al. pp. 314-15. Also Lourens P. van den Bosch, ‘India and
,
,

the apostolate of St Thomas’, in The apocryphal Acts of Thomas, ed. Jan N. Bremmer, pp. 125-48,
esp. 144.
210

Notable examples are the Scythians and Germans: cf. Chapter 2, section I II. 4 above.

302

Contexts ofa discourse

But this was not without its problems. Ultimately it is hard to get beyond
the ambivalence ofwisdom, especially in its alien form: whatever authority it

might otherwise confer, it might still be uncomfortably close to the magical
arts.

The range of meanings in the word Chaldaeus is a case in point. In

this chapter, the charges levelled against Apollonius

and the consequent

defensiveness they produce on the part of his hagiographer may be taken

most obvious reminder (1.3). Yet on the other hand, we cannot
forget that wisdom, perhaps by its very alienness, is potentially a source of
as the

authority: to wit the Egyptian travels of Solon as recounted in Herodotus,

or Plato’s own travels.

The different ways in which Calanus was presented show what kind
of ambiguities we are dealing with here. As we have seen, he is explicitly
praised or criticised by particular authors. His suicide was the kind of

heroic action that made him memorable for Philo, for one, and for the

majority of western medieval Alexander stories. If we bear in mind how

much exhibitionism attended the death of Peregrinus in Lucian, or the feats
of Syria’s ascetic stars, we should not be surprised that this was to become
his distinctive feature, and to some extent of Brahmans in general, if we are

to judge from the Christian Fathers.

As we have seen, when Greeks first began to pay attention to India, it did
not particularly seem to be a place of holiness. This may seem an improbable conclusion, given the importance of Brahmans and other ascetics in
Hellenistic and Roman-period sources, beginning with the Alexander historians, and given the explicit presence of other ‘alien wisdoms’ of the east,

from the time of Herodotus and Plato. If the conclusion of Chapter 1 is
correct, then we would have to scrutinise the Achaemenid context within
which Greeks first found out about India - a task which is beyond the
limits of this book.

As a rider to this conclusion, it must be said that after Alexander’s expedition, and with the raised Greek consciousness of and interest in a wider

geographical world that attended it, India became largely a place of pilgrimage. From the Greek point of view, India’s relative proximity to Babylonia

and Mesopotamia brought with it an obvious comparison with Chaldaeans,
Magians and Babylonians. These societies all shared the ability from an early
period to write, and in each case the priestly caste was guardian not only of
holiness but of holy texts specifically. In each case, there is in naming these

groups some degree of confusion in the minds of Greeks and later Romans

between the ethnikon and the designation of a social group. Yet ultimately,

Brahmans were destined never to be as well known as Chaldaeans, or to

come as much to the forefront of astrological thought as did Babylonian

Wisdom
mathematici

111
.

If astrology and other forms

303

of divination were the pre-

serve of Chaldaeans, then the most distinctive mark of Brahmans was their

propensity for self-immolation. Hence the enduring fame of Calanus, however dubious his reputation as an ascetic. By the late-antique period it had

become impossible to think of Brahmans without the intervening lens of
Christian asceticism (and indeed of its polytheist competitors). Chaldaeans

seem not to have been remembered so specifically by name, but more generally and vaguely as a group. If such terms are anything to go by (and
they are no more than a vague pointer), the Brahmans never fully lost the
exoticism of the unknown.
A major problem in the attempt to contextualise Roman ideas about
India’s

holiness

is

the exceptionalism of Egypt. Apollonius’ itinerary,

which to some extent follows Alexander’s, is one reason to consider the
comparison; overlap in the use of the term Gymnosophist is another 212
.

Certainly,
in

some geographic features the two lands were known to have

common 213 the enormous river(s), crocodiles, elephants, the priests and
:

perhaps most importantly a sense of cultural antiquity. Yet Romans also had
a keen sense of the ways in which Egypt was unique, particularly geographical features relating to the Nile, its flooding and its centrality to human
settlement there. If we were to compare Egyptian religion with Indian, we
would soon find that there is no Indian equivalent for the very monument-

based Herodotean impression of Egypt. We can certainly talk about Roman

Egyptomania in the aftermath of the Battle of Acdum
but it does not
follow that there was a corresponding ‘Indomania. Nor is Indian writing
214

,

an issue for Greeks and Romans. This latter fact comes as something of a
surprise, given that writing was certainly known in Indian society by this

time; sacred and state records were administered by Brahmans themselves.

Yet this remains a blind spot in Greco-Roman ethnography of India.

To speak of the Brahmans and Gymnosophists as a Hellenistic fiction
might seem unnecessarily skeptical, and to do so would be wrong in the
most obvious sense. To be sure, a number of references in this chapter indicate that there is substantial independent Indian evidence to corroborate the

111

In fact, with a few exceptions (e.g., Amm. Marc. 23.6.33 discussed above), Brahmans differ from the
other groups in that they were not overtly linked with astrology in the eyes of Greeks and Romans,

even though we know from surviving Sanskrit texts that there was an ancient tradition of Indian
astrology. This factor, due perhaps to the relative lateness of their ‘discovery’, was probably a factor
in the positive image they won among some Christians.
212
213

TLL VL2.2382.12ff. for supposed Ethiopian links.
For Strabo’s frequent references to Egypt in his description of India, compare Chapter 2, section

Jer. Ep. 107.8.3; cf.

III. 6 above.
214

See, e.g., Versluys, Aegyptiaca Romana\ more generally, Curl, Egyptomania esp. pp. 1-36.
,

Contexts ofa discourse

304

existence of these groups. Their historical reality is beyond question, even
if there are considerable difficulties in trying to distinguish the dynamics of

ethnic identity or of social division. Yet on the other hand, we must be very

aware of the ways in which these ascetics filled a need on the part of Greeks

and Romans: the need for holy people, leading a gloriously independent
existence within their own social worlds. This independence was accentu-

ated by the spatial distance between Brahmans, as indeed of other eastern
sages, from the Mediterranean world. As I have tried to suggest, this need

had much to do with the ‘revolutions of wisdom’ (G. E. R. Lloyd’s term)
that accompanied the end of the classical polis; the crisis surrounding the

Sophists, for one, underlined the need for a mystified kind of wisdom. Both

of these features added much to the image of Brahmans as figures, symbols
almost, of parrhesia. Thus the question is not, in the first instance, whether
texts like the Alexander romance and Palladius’ ‘reflect genuine knowledge

about Indian philosophers ’, 115 but for what reasons Indian ascetics mattered,
in so far as they did matter, to the authors and audiences of Greco-Roman

works.

Not unlike Apollonius in the battle between pagans and Christians more
than two centuries after his death, Brahmans came to be a screen onto which
contemporary debates could be projected. In talking about Brahmans, there
was not so much at stake; they were open to appropriation for the purposes

of those choosing to write about them. Their inherent exoticism also meant
that they were always open to being redescribed. It is in this way that they

had any importance for Greeks and Romans: it is not so much a question of
the Brahmans themselves, but of what underlying issues could be projected

onto them. It is in order at this point to consider the image of Persians to

emerge from Roman expressions of Mithraism. Cumont and other scholars
of an earlier generation tended to take at face value the asserted historicity
of their Persian connections. More recently, the work of Richard Gordon
has cast doubt on these by stressing their cognitive value: they have emerged
as an ethnic invention, answering

Roman ideas of what Persian might be

like. Indeed, at several points, this does coincide with historical reality; yet

that does not detract from the fact of that ethnic invention

216
.

Brahmans offered the opportunity to construct an
ideal which was by turns unlikely and partly desirable: that of wisdom
In particular, the

215

216

Stoneman, ‘Brahmans’, 500 (cf. ‘Naked philosophers’, 99).
R. L.

Gordon, ‘The sacred geography of a mithraeum the example of Sette Sfere,’ Journal of
:

Mithraic Studies 1 (1976), pp. 119-65, esp. 145-6; as well as his ‘Reality, evocation and boundaries
in the Mysteries of Mithras>

Journal ofMithraic Studies 3 (1980), 19-99, esp. 68. Cf. Momigliano,

p. 141: ‘What circulated in the Hellenistic world under the names of Zoroaster and
of the Magi was a mixture of some genuine information with much arbitrary imagination.’

Alien wisdom

,

Wisdom

305

without paideia. In this sense we should read Philostratus’ Indian sages as
a counterpoint to the holy men of polytheist writers such as Eunapius and
Plotinus, the distance between them lying, most pointedly, in the sphere of

paideia. The Brahmans of Palladius’ text are harder to fit into a milieu that

makes them intelligible, given the complexities of that work. In the most
obvious sense, they owe much to the Alexander tradition stretching back to
long before the Christian period. On the other hand, if we accept that their
social marginality and attendant parrhesia stand out as their salient features,

we see nothing so much as the overlap of different ascetic traditions. Our
analysis has shown a variety of features, Christian and Cynic.
The problem of ‘comparative asceticism’ is in the end a difficult one,
and one which militates against the formulation of sweeping theses in this
conclusion 217 If we must concede, first, that there are features of ascetic
life which overlap between different cultures and religions; and, secondly,
that both Philostratus’ and even more so Palladius’ texts were written in
milieux which brought together various religious traditions, we see how
.

hard it is to unravel. In purely historical terms, we cannot underestimate
the practical difficulties involved in analysing ascetic practice across cultural

boundaries. The ascetic repertoire all too often involves the same practices,

such as mortification of the flesh, whatever their contextual differences may
be. Whereas ethnographic writing in ancient (and indeed in modern) times

often focuses on cultural difference, to the point of distortion, it is the task of
the scholar to restore the balance by seeking the points of similarity between

those speaking and those being spoken about. The critical problem that has

emerged with Palladius’ text is to diagnose its consciousness of similarity
or difference.

VI.

CONCLUSION

A number of important recent works have inquired into the influence of
Indian culture on Greco-Roman

218
.

In the religious sphere recent decades

have seen, for example, Sedlar’s exploration of the links and influences of
Indian religion on Gnosticism

219
.

The wide-ranging, valuable and more

circumspect work of Halbfass also goes to some lengths in its use of
217

For the difficulties involved in interpreting asceticism across cultural boundaries, see Wimbush and
Valantasis, Asceticism.

218

Representative of the tendency to interpret similarities as borrowing is David Kamos, ‘On Apollo-

219

Cf. E. Conze, ‘Buddhism and Gnosis’, in Further Buddhist studies (Oxford: Cassirer, 1975), pp.

nius, Pythagoras and the Jaina vision’, in Ionian philosophy ed. K. J. Boudouris (Athens: Interna,

tional Association for Greek Philosophy, 1989), pp. 211-17.

15-32.

Contexts ofa discourse

306
this

approach. In this chapter issues of influence have been avoided as

intractable, or at best speculative, in favour of a more limited scrutiny of

Roman culture. While Greek and Roman sources frequently spoke of cultural influence in terms of parentage, such claims tend to be problematic

and subject to specific and distorting agendas. These ancient paradigms
of cultural interaction tend often to be suspiciously linear and unidirectional. Instead, the set of questions

I

have pursued here are more geared

to those aspects of Greco-Roman culture which were addressed by ‘India’.
It

seems more feasible to ask: What did India mean to Romans? (Again,

in examining mostly sources of the

Roman principate and empire, we find

that the basic features go back to early Hellenistic times; again there is the

doxographic problem.) In the end, the inquiry into Roman literary images

of Indian wisdom or Indian holiness is an inquiry into the closely related
questions, how did Roman culture react to India?; and how did Roman
culture construct India?

This chapter, which set out in the first instance to examine Brahmans, has

moved far and wide. Its breadth of focus has been necessary to understand
the impression they made, and to outline some of the issues involved in
their status as bearers of holiness. If it has been necessary to consider wisdom
and holiness together, that zeugma should be seen as a feature of Greco-

Roman conceptions of Indian sages. No one will deny that the Hellenistic
period witnessed radical changes in the politics of knowledge. At a time

of increased specialisation and professionalisation (a process going back to
Aristotle and the Lyceum, and even earlier to the emergence of the Sophists),

Near Eastern cultures appeared to honour special kinds of knowledge. If, to
return to our earlier definition, wisdom is mystified knowledge, then these
eastern kinds of wisdom remained pure for the reason that they seemed

immune to the demystification that accompanied the Sophistic movement
and the specialisation of Hellenistic science. Like Chaldaeans and other
Near Eastern bearers of wisdom, the Brahmans offered the Hellenistic and
later the Roman world the nostalgic opportunity to reinvent wisdom. But
the effective failure to recognise the existence of Indian astrology saved the

Brahmans from the negative Christian view of Chaldaean and Babylonian
wisdom.
In an influential analysis of the Oedipus legend, J.-P. Vernant 220 speaks

of the pervading ambiguity of Oedipus’ character in Sophocles’ Oedipus
tyrannus: he is by turns at the lowest and highest social position, rescuer

220

‘Ambiguity and reversal: on the enigmatic structure of Oedipus Rex

,

in Jean-Pierre Vernant and

Pierre Vidal-Naquet, Myth and tragedy in ancient Greece (New York: Zone, 1988), pp. 113-40.

Wisdom

307

from and cause of the plague — these and other contradictions are tied

up with his position, from birth, as an outsider to Thebes (though one
it is true, from within). After all, if spatial separation marks

originating,

out something or someone as sacred, then that same separation can just
as easily impart pariah status.

A comparable ambiguity of the outsider can

be found in differing views of the Brahmans, alien sages par excellence.

The parrhesia linked to their marginal status made it possible for them to
express social criticism in ways which Cynic philosophers would have found

commendable. In this way they were real bearers of objectivity. On the other
hand, their behaviour, and particularly their propensity for suicide by fire,
was dangerously close to the exhibitionism of Cynic sages. The figure of
Calanus is a prime case of alien wisdom run wild, and in fact attracting
varied responses: for Alexander in the Alexander romance this was an heroic
act of endurance, whereas for Dandamis in Palladius it showed a lack of self-

control, a dubious exhibitionism. Problems of this kind were, in general,

very close to the ambiguity of the Cynic sage himself, if we consider their
reception in late antiquity; or of the most extreme types of holy people, who

were eventually to cause the church to promote monasticism as a means
of exercising control over problematic would-be Anthonys. Ultimately, the
behaviour of such people was both the crowning glory of the Christian
faith,

way beyond the time of the Great Persecution, and it was also a

potential danger to society.

Brahmans should be emphasised in the
emerged in the foregoing pages: first, their position on

In sum, two features of the
profile that has

the margins of society, exaggerated by ethnic difference and geographical
location; and, second, their indifference to paideia in which respect they
,

seemed to obviate a major problem faced by Christianity as it reached
the higher social strata, namely the ongoing, often troubled attraction of
and Augustine.
Both of these were part of their image as social critics, and even reinforced

classical paideia to aristocratic Christians such as Jerome

In this regard they came, in late antiquity, to resemble by turns the
Cynic sage and the Christian holy man. Of these ethnographic features,
it.

the second could conceivably have turned out differently, had Hellenistic

Greeks shown greater interest than they did in learning the languages of
their neighbours

221

221
.

Momigliano, Alien wisdom pp. 8 and 149.
,

Conclusion:
Intersections ofa discourse

I.

It

is

MUTATIONS OF INDOGRAPHY

the imagination that has received the greatest prominence in this

account. From a Roman point of view, India remained an ‘oneiric horizon’
(to borrow the subtitle of Jacques le Goffs classic essay), a moveable site
of exotic fantasy that drifted in and out of focus at different times and in

different contexts

1
.

Nonetheless, four broad phases of Indography can be

identified. The following periods are offered despite the abiding practical

problem of distinguishing earlier authors from the contexts in which they
are preserved. The first two belong, strictly speaking, to the prehistory of

our topic: in these, spanning the archaic to Hellenistic periods of Greek
literature, all the evidence is or originally was in Greek. But these two phases

covered in Chapter i shaped the subsequent history of Indography.
i.

In the Achaemenid phase, Greek images of India were formed in close

relation to the Iranian world. This period deserves some emphasis in the

history of Indography, since it has tended to be overlooked in favour of

post-Achaemenid developments. We should not forget that when Scylax
of Caryanda became the earliest Greek person known to have travelled
to India, he travelled at the behest of Darius I. Furthermore, Herodotus’

description, the earliest account to survive in a complete text,

is

part of

a survey of Darius’ satrapies. There are strong hints that the Achaemenid

empire was the original setting of Indography; elements that were later

embroidered and expanded upon were initially gathered here. Even if details
were not filled in until later, this is where a basic framework of knowledge
emerged. Starting with Ctesias, the marvel was to prove a major part of
Indography, though at this stage expressed by verbal rather than visual

1

Jacques le Goff, ‘The medieval west and the Indian Ocean: an oneiric horizon’, in his Time, work
and culture in the Middle Ages (University of Chicago Press, 1980), pp. 189-200; cf. Monique Mund-

Dopchie, ‘L’invention de l’lnde merveilleuse. Structures de l’imaginaire et d£couverte de 1 Autre
’

lointain’, in Inde, Grece ancienne, ed. Jean-Claude Carri£re et al. (1995),

308

pp. 99-112.

The making ofRoman India

309

means. The marvel, linked as it was with questions of truth and fiction,

was to have special significance in historiography as well as the novel. On the
other hand, Herodotus’ account contains no mention of marvellous people.
This contradiction suggests that there was no well worked-out discourse

about India in the classical period of Greek literature; even, perhaps, that
India carried no special significance to the Greek world at this time.
2.

Once Alexander’s expedition brought Greek and Macedonian troops

to the Indus Valley, this was to change significantly. The expedition and its

immediate aftermath considerably fleshed out the picture that had already
emerged. But most importantly, this Hellenistic period reveals greater interest in distant lands generally, as well as greater interaction between Greek

and non-Greek people of Asia. To a substantial degree, later writers were
to look back on the expedition as the formative moment in Greco-Roman

Indography, though in practice its elements were already familiar before-

hand. The repertoire of monsters and marvellous people, already known

expanded considerably in this period. This was the time of
Megasthenes, who, travelling just a few years after Alexander, was held up
to Ctesias,

by several writers as an authority. With Megasthenes the question of truth

and fiction came to be centred on autopsy. His mixed reputation in later
times rested on contradictory principles: firstly, the marvellous nature of
the material aroused many suspicions; secondly, the fact that he visited the

court of Chandragupta Maurya lent him a high degree of credibility. This is
also the period in which wisdom and holiness became key themes in Indo-

graphy, stemming from Alexander’s interview with the ‘naked philosophers’.
In one way or another,

it

was Alexander that was to cast a long shadow

over subsequent accounts of India. In historical terms it is important here
to emphasise an aspect of Alexander’s expedition that the sources leave
implicit: its continuities with the Achaemenid world. Indeed, it can be
argued that in the geographic reach of his expedition Alexander was highly

aware of the extent of the Achaemenid empire.
3. The Roman phase is characterised above all by the doxographic habit,
by which writers on India appealed to their Hellenistic and even earlier

predecessors. Often this was expressed amid the critical evaluation of different sources. The period ofAugustus saw a substantial amount of rhetoric

about empire: one of the functions of India was to provide a marker for
the easternmost point of the

Roman empire, just as it had marked the

eastern limit of Alexander’s expedition. In the

eminent case of Trajan,

standing at the head of the Persian Gulf, imperial ambitions were readily focused on Alexander.

The rhetoric of imperial grandeur should more

readily be understood in terms of the self-presentation of Roman emperors,

3io

Intersections ofa discourse

have argued, than strategic military policy. Whenever Alexander was
mentioned in such rhetoric, India was the most obvious symbol of his
I

achievements.

This was also the time of heightened commercial contact, mostly through
the monsoon route but also via the Persian Gulf and then across land to
the Mediterranean. About the dynamics of these exchanges we can make

some reconstruction from the varied evidence, archaeological, documentary and literary. It made remarkably little impact on Indography, but it
was not completely without effect. Pliny’s Natural history and even Strabo’s

Geography may rely in the first instance on book learning in their construction of authority; but they are by no means innocent of the new infor-

mation brought by traders at this time, even if long-standing prejudice
against traders brought disparaging comments from them on the subject.

Rather, they reveal the combination of various strands of topographic and
geographic knowledge. Perhaps surprisingly, it is the most technical and
scientific

of the imperial-age works concerning territorial space, namely

Ptolemy’s Geography, that makes the most obvious use of information only
lately acquired in a commercial context.

This would seem the best way

to explain Ptolemy’s knowledge of the Bay of Bengal. With the exception

of Ptolemy, awareness of trade links with India was principally focused

on the moral implications of Roman consumption, and reflected a Romecentred perspective. But occasionally there are references to India itself as a
place of luxurious consumption and its attendant immoralities (discussed

below in relation to Curtius Rufus). In a few cases, this moralising view
was contrasted with the mystifying sense of India as a place of wisdom and
holiness.
4. The Christian phase of Indography rests heavily on an appropriation
of the Augustan discourse about empire. This we see especially clearly in the

early fifth-century world history by Orosius which, tellingly, begins with

a description of the world. But it also contains traces of the very different

discourse about Christian mission.

The Macedonian’s plea, ‘Come and

help us’, in Paul’s dream (Acts 16:10 ) was to have obvious implications for
India, not only for its remoteness, but also for the tenacity of its religious
traditions centred on Brahmans and Gymnosophists. Awareness of these
charismatic individuals brought a sense that India needed more substantial

and urgent missionary activity. This is expressed in the apocryphal Acts of
Thomas. Philostratus’ Life ofApollonius is an important work for this later
phase of Indography, for its polytheist agenda apparently gives powerful
evidence for Christian thinking about religious travel: it appears to be at
the very edge of debates between polytheists and Christians.

The making ofRoman India

311

The later Roman empire witnessed substantial interest in Indian wisdom.

Much of this can be attributed to an ongoing fascination with Alexander, among both polytheists and Christians. But this fascination was more

notional than the result of actual contact. Archaeological evidence suggests
a slump in commerce in the third century ad. Though the late fifth and
sixth centuries were to see something of a revival, as Cosmas Indicopleustes

shows, it was never again to reach its apogee of the first two centuries ad.

But by this period, nonetheless, India was already established in the mental
matrix represented in the world maps of Orosius and Isidore, maps that

were to have a profound influence on western medieval cartography. Its
place at the far eastern edge was ensured by a number of related factors:
its

link with the earthly paradise, the persistence of the Alexander legend,

and the need to balance the Pillars of Hercules on the western edges of the

T-O schema with India on the eastern edge.
II.

READERS, SPEAKERS AND POPULAR XENOLOGY

In order to give greater concreteness to the pattern described above, let us

consider a passage that crystallises many of its issues, pointing both forward

and backward in time. It serves also to summarise the concerns of this book
as a whole.

Curtius Rufus interrupts his narrative of Alexander’s campaign to offer

an excursus about India (8.9.1—36). Unlike Arrian’s lengthier Indica, this
is integrated into the history itself and shares its concerns
and techniques. Assuming that Curtius was writing in the early years of

description

Claudius’ reign, we may fit him into the third, Roman phase of Indogra-

phy outlined above; yet he should also be seen alongside the Alexander
romance tradition, which was to have a textual diffusion of extraordinary complexity, involving several different languages, in the early centuries ad.

Hence he looks forward, as a Latin writer about Alexander,

also to the very substantial medieval tradition shared by many Christian
writers.
Earlier, a distinction was made between texts in which India is central and

those in which it is referred to merely in passing (introduction to Chapter 2).

One of the several significant points about the Curtius passage is that it
challenges that pattern: on the one hand, the Indian episode was by any

account tremendously important to Alexander’s expedition, and hence its
significance to his narrative as a whole; on the other hand, this is merely

an excursus, standing outside the narrative flow of the work, rather than a

prime concern.

Intersections ofa discourse

312

The passage has all the marks of a colourful and complex piece of Indography. Curtius begins with a description of the geographical orientation

of India (chapters 1—2), before moving on at some length to rivers (411).

Some natural historical details of flora and fauna are presented, some
From land to people: the remaining

as divergences from nature (12-19).

chapters are devoted to Indian ‘manners and customs’, including an account

of their taboo of tree-violation (34) and their astronomical pursuits (33, 353 6).

A feature that marks out this description from others

is

the amount

of attention given to the Indian king (23-30), whose lifestyle is presented
in morally loaded language as a case of intentional luxuria exceeding the

vices of all other peoples (23).

A lengthy description of the king’s life of

luxury, which includes the conspicuous use of gold, silver, precious stones

and aromatics, reaches a crescendo with his exploitation of women:
The women cook food and pour wine, something that is copiously consumed by all
Indians. Courtesans, calling on the gods of the night with a traditional incantation,

take the king to bed once he is lulled by wine and sleep. (8.9.30) 2

This is the very point at which Curtius uses strongly loaded moral lan-

guage in making the transition from one kind of ethnographic language to
another:

Who would expect to find concern for wisdom among these vices? There

is a

wild

and boorish group they call Wise Men. 3

As in Cicero, 4 Indian virtue and Indian barbarism are mentioned in the
same breath, almost as if one is dependent on the other. This we might call
the paradox of alien wisdom. Both virtue and barbarism are most clearly
seen at a distance, and from this point of view imply radical difference
between Indians and Romans.
A number of features align this description with others. Winter and

summer occur, as it were, in reverse order: here is the principle of inversion
or Verkehrte Welt. It is a travesty of nature that brooks no explanation: ‘there

no reason why nature inverts itself’ (13). 5 In this way, India’s profound

is

strangeness is also a means of understanding it. By the same token, there are
a number of comparisons, explicitly with the Nile of Egypt (9) and with the

animals of Africa (17); implicitly perhaps with Persian hunting (28), Arabian

unguents (27) and Babylonian or Chaldaean astronomy (35-36). If that were

2

feminae epulas parant; ab isdem uinum ministratur, cuius omnibus Indis largus est usus. regem mero
somnoque sopitum in cubiculum pelices referunt patrio carmine noctium inuocantes deos.

3

quis credat inter haec uitia esse sapientiae? unum agreste et horridum genus est quod Sapientes uocant.

4

Tusc. 5.77-78, discussed at Chapter 2, section II.3.

5

nec cur uerterit se causa natura.

The making ofRoman India

313

not enough, there is a hint of the question of the limits of knowledge, for
the description of rivers ends with a reference to the many watercourses
that are ‘not known’ (ignobiles, n). There is an aphoristic formulation of

the familiar Hippocratic idea of environmental determinism: ‘in their case,
as usually happens, the lie of the land shapes the talents of people’ (20).

All these features are familiar from the foregoing discussion.

6

But the

excursus differs from many other Indographies in one important aspect: at

no point does Curtius mention his sources. This omission is, to a degree, a
feature of Curtius’ style, just as it is of Diodorus Siculus’. However, it does

point us in the direction of a major context for the production and circulation of information about India: the rhetorical tradition, particularly as

manifested in the suasoria. Historical topics were certainly a staple of higher
training in rhetoric. But it is necessary here to understand the term historical in a loose manner: ‘the imaginary themes [plasmata) of the declaimers

are set vaguely in the classical past. Sometimes the mere addition of names

turns them into a sort of rudimentary fiction.’ 7 Of 350 surviving Greek

declamations with historical topics, some twenty-five involve Alexander,
the Persian and Peloponnesian wars being the other favourite topics. There

can be no doubt that Curtius was influenced by the tradition of the Roman
rhetorical schools, not merely in his speeches but in the dramatic quality

of his writing generally.

8

Nor is Curtius alone in this. In various genres, historical exempla were
cited as a matter of course to prove a particular point. For example, the

commonplace that ‘nobody is without vice’ is proven by the fact that Cato
lacked moderation, Cicero steadfastness, and so on. 9 It is noteworthy that
the first suasoria of the elder Seneca is addressed to Alexander, urging him

not to sail the outer Ocean after traversing India. The geography implied

by this is of course counter-factual when compared with the Alexander
historians. Valerius Maximus also makes use of Alexander in a number of
different contexts.

6

7

10

It is

in cases such as these that we glimpse how ideas

ingenia hominum, sicut ubique, apud illos locorum quoque situs format.

D. A. Russell, Greek declamation (Cambridge University Press, 1983), p. 106; cf. Marrou, History
of education, pp. 202-3; Robert A. Raster, ‘Controlling reason: declamation in rhetorical education
at Rome’, in Education in Greek and Roman antiquity ed. Yun Lee Too (Leiden: Brill, 2001),
,

8

pp. 317-37*
E.g., Elizabeth Baynham, Alexander the Great: the unique history of Quintus Curtius (Ann Arbor:

University of Michigan Press, 1998), pp. 15-56.
9

Stanley F. Bonner, Roman declamation in the late Republic and early Empire (Liverpool University
Press, 1949), pp. 61-2.

10

1.8 ext.

10 on Alexanders interview with Calanus. Otherwise India is worthy of mention on the

subject of sati (2.6.14), for the Indians’ powers of endurance (3.3 ext. 6) and their longevity (8.13
ext. 5) Valerius Maximus’ work ‘provided a stock of rhetorical illustrations and in its treatment of

Intersections ofa discourse

314

about India were inculcated into the minds of young Romans and thereby
naturalised. In this regard, it is not amiss to underline the related concepts

of practice and everyday life, in view of both the breadth and the depth of
their impact on Roman lives.

11

This leads to the broader question that has all the features of the chicken

and the egg: did Alexander account for Greek and Roman interest in India,
or conversely was it India’s enormity and remoteness that informed Alexander’s reputation? This would be differently answered, depending on the kind
of evidence examined. But it would seem reasonable to conclude that the
reputations of Alexander and India were to some degree mutually constituting. True enough, there is much in the Indographic profile that does not

necessarily have to be linked to him; but in practice much did, including

the myths about Dionysus and Heracles.

Fragments emerged as a lowest common denominator in the examination
of historians, geographers and natural historians, reflecting the need to
appeal to authorities.

11

What we see here is a variation on the same principle,

or perhaps even its antithesis. Extemporaneous public speaking on a topic

such as India necessarily drew on a common fund of information shared by
speaker and listener; by the same token, it provided the stimulus to fabricate
material that would be appropriate to the context of any speech. Fabrication

could be done on the basis also of other ethnographies, as we sense in
Curtius’ use of the comparative mode discussed above. The common fund

of ethnographic discourse provided the material for a constant and flexible
dialogue between India’s strangeness and its capacity to be known. To be
sure, this aspect of

Roman rhetorical practice makes it difficult, or even

unnecessary, to distinguish between producing and conveying information

about India. In such cases, the two processes were combined in the practice

of a speaker.

To focus on Roman practice is to broaden

the question of map-

mindedness. As we saw in Chapter 5, strong cases have variously been made
that the Romans conceived of space in terms of itineraries or provinces; that

they relied mainly on verbal or visual representations thereof. 13 The case of

this material demonstrated the various rhetorical shapes an exemplum could take and the ways to

introduce, join, and conclude such stories.’ Martin W. Bloomer, Valerius Maximus and the rhetoric

of the new nobility (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992), p. 2.
11

Two important articulations are Pierre Bourdieu, Outline of a theory ofpractice tr. Richard Nice
,

(Cambridge University Press, 19 77); and Michel de Certeau, The practice of everyday life tr. Steven
,

F.

Rendall (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984).

12

Chapter 2, section III. 7.

13

Thus, with markedly different emphases, Whittaker, Rome and its frontiers pp. 63-87, and Talbert,
,

‘Rome’s provinces’; Brodersen, Terra cognita, and Talbert, ‘Cartography and taste’.

The making ofRoman India

315

Curtius’ extract reminds us of the platitudinous manner in which visions

of India were regenerated, with little interest in the addition of new information. Such practice of rhetoric was the means by which children learned

about the orbis terrarum and their place in it, sometimes with the help of
visual cues

14
.

Nor is rhetoric purely an issue in the western Mediterranean:

declamation was a major part of the Second Sophistic in the Greek east also.

What we do see is that India was relevant to topics related to Alexander,
to Rome’s imperial grandeur, and often to the two in combination. The
Peutinger map shows that such information could be represented visually,
and that Alexander was sometimes part of those representations. Indicating both ports and the roads, the Peutinger map forms an obvious contrast
with the Periplus and its coast-hugging route. Certainly Strabo, Pliny and
Ptolemy give much greater prominence to coastal locations in covering
peninsular India, whereas the Alexander historians present northern over-

land routes, but the overall point is clear: a variety of travels underlie such
representations, and it is important to grasp the resulting coexistence of
different kinds of geographical information

underpinning any one such

text or map. Ideas of India can clearly be traced in

both the verbal and

visual dimensions. The verbal far outweighs the visual in terms of surviv-

ing evidence, but nonetheless there are signs that the Romans did have a

more developed tradition of visual maps than is sometimes supposed. To
take the one example of a depiction of India, the Peutinger map, it appears
that its presentation was geared more to an overall effect than to practical
utility, even if actual travels ultimately underlie its production.

III.

IMPERIAL MEMORIES OF ALEXANDER

The history of Indography in section I above proceeds in terms of the experience of actual travellers between the Mediterranean and the subcontinent.

Yet the rhetoric discussed in section II, constituting the everyday practice

of Romans, is of a different order of experience: less direct but more widely
shared by the vast majority of Romans who did not themselves make the
journey, but nonetheless were imaginatively engaged with the exotic effects

of India. In recognising the difference between these registers of geographic
information, it is useful to use a study of social memory: Wickham and
Fentress

draw on psychological studies to distinguish between episodic

memory and semantic memory. The first of these is linked to specific
learning episodes, whereas the second is tied to shared knowledge rather

14

Panegyrici Latini 9.20.2-9.21.3 Mynors.

3i 6

Intersections ofa discourse

than specific experiences necessarily. 15 Significantly, this distinction serves
as a reminder of just

how few persons would, in the course of a lifetime,

make the journey from Italy, or any other part of the Mediterranean, all
the way to south Asia. One such person would likely have been the Periplus
author, to read between the lines of that text, and then even he probably
started only in the Nile valley. Furthermore, there is no apparent evidence

of south Asians in Rome, however cosmopolitan the city may have been

by the first century ad. 16 For the vast majority, the stay-at-homes, on the
other hand, representations of India would have functioned at the level of

semantic memory. The shared knowledge of semantic memory was most
obviously transmitted in the kind of rhetorical education discussed above.
In his varied guises, Alexander is a figure that spanned the distinction: the

semantic memory of India was contingent on his supposed experience. This
we have seen in each of the three contexts of Indography: most obviously
in that of empire and wisdom, for it was only with his expedition that the

Indian sages are reported in Greek sources. Most surprising in this regard is
the context of commodities. Yet this too is clear when Pliny in his Natural
history describes particular trees in relation to the expedition (12.21, 24;
cf. 13.3).
it is

Pliny’s learning certainly embraced the Alexander historians, but

particularly striking to note the references to Alexander in two texts

related to the long-distance exchange of goods: Periplus 41 and 47 and the
briefer Parthian stations (as a city-founder:

FGrH 781 F2.1). 17 Though the

earliest surviving Alexander histories connect him with the sages, texts of

the Second Sophistic present Alexander himself as a sage: Philostratus’ Life

ofApollonius and Plutarch’s On the fortune ofAlexander. This is part of the
broadening scope of the image of Alexander in the Roman empire, and
prepares the way for the medieval image of Alexander the pilgrim. In the

Middle Ages his spiritual aspects come to predominate over his political
and military leadership, as is evident in the Hereford map.
If we take Alexander as a symbol

of empire, we quickly see that the

imperial context embraces other registers of geographical knowledge:

it

would thus be wrong to think that the three contexts of Indography are
fully parallel to each other. Beyond this consciousness of Alexander, there
15

James Fentress and Chris Wickham, Social memory (Oxford: Blackwell, 1992), p. 20, drawing on
the work of Endel Tulving, e.g., his essay, ‘Episodic and semantic memory’, in The organization of
memory, ed. Endel Tulving and Wayne Donaldson (New York: Academic Press, 1972), pp. 381-403.

16

David Noy, Foreigners and Rome: citizens and strangers (London: Duckworth, 2000) There is however
some evidence for Indians in Alexandria: Dio Chrys. Or. 32.40.
Norbert Kramer, ‘Das Itinerar iTaOpol TlapdiKoi des Isidor von Charax - Beschreibung eines
.

17

Handelsweges?’, Klio 85 (2003), 120-30 makes a strong case for a military rather than commercial
route, yet the fragmentary nature of the text makes such clear-cut options implausible.

The making ofRoman India

317

can be no doubt, at the level of a different kind of history, that the political

made possible the much greater
awareness of India in the first century ad. The pax Romana not only made
revolution of the late first century bc

possible the long-distance exchange of goods to a greater degree than earlier;
it

also heightened the demand for luxury goods in the Roman world, both

in the city of Rome and in other urban centres. The ivory statuette found
in Pompeii, though seemingly unmatched in the ancient Mediterranean,

may be taken as representative of this.
In this broad sense, Said’s model of Orientalism provides the inescapable
framework of Roman Indography. It is appropriate to assert that the imperial context of geographical information deserves emphasis over others.

This conclusion is in keeping with Foucault’s definition of a discourse, a
system of knowledge largely defined by the power relations in which it is
entwined. To see empire as a transcendent context is, admittedly, to adopt

an early twenty-first century view, by now several years into the Iraq War.
There are however two points to be made in conclusion, both of them
challenging or at least qualifying the orientalist model in its usual form.
First,

the imperial context here is no simple matter of us-and-them. In

a prominent position early in his work, Strabo speaks of the geographic

knowledge made possible by the military successes of both the Roman and
Parthian empires:
Indeed, the ascendancy of the Romans and the Parthians have offered contemporary writers much geographical knowledge, just as Alexander’s campaign did for
earlier writers, as Eratosthenes points out. (t.z.x C14)

18

The point here is the inclusion of the Parthian empire within Strabo’s
purview. This is presumably linked to his Pontic origins, not far from the
Parthian world at a time of its strength. Even if Strabo was writing at a time

of detente between Parthia and Rome, this remains somewhat surprising —

and beyond what the usual concepts of orientalism might lead one to
expect 19 To emphasise the Parthians in the economy of knowledge is thus
to be alert to the funnelling effects of an intermediate people between Rome
and India.
Second, Alexander in this account (especially in the first two chapters
above) gives the Roman empire itself an ambiguous aspect. On the one
.

18

Kcri

yap Sr) ttoAu ti toT? vuv f| tcov Pcopaicov emKpcrraa Kai tcov FlapSuaicov Ttjs ToiauTT|s

EpTTEipias TTpoaSeScoKE, KaQcnrEp tois petcx tt]v AAE^avSpou OTpcrmav, cos <kncjiv poctoctOevtis.
19

Much more crudely than Saids relational view of east and west, Samuel P. Huntingtons concept of
a Clash ofcivilisations and the remaking ofthe world order (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996) has

been embraced in the official rhetoric of the United States in the new millennium. Its essentialist
tendencies are obvious.

Intersections ofa discourse

3 i8

hand, Rome became the empire par excellence for the west in the Middle

Ages and beyond. This obvious point can hardly be disputed 20 On the
.

other hand, if Alexander himself was an important figure in the creation of

an imperial ideology (and India a common element linking Alexander and
the Roman empire), he was himself highly conscious of Achaemenid rulers.

India is important here, for his desire (pothos) to conquer India and reach
the end of the world seems very much like a desire to fulfil the achievements
of the Persian kings. Alexander’s concern with India seems, from this point

of view, like the consummate performance of Iranian kingship. From a

Roman viewpoint, India fulfilled imperial desires by virtue of the memory
of Alexander, not least, as we have seen, in the case of the emperor Trajan 21
.

Behind Trajan and, even more directly, behind Alexander, the Achaemenid
precedent bulks large.
20

The point has been often made, e.g. Michael W. Doyle, Empires (Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
1986), p. 25. Further, Thomas J. Barfield usefully distinguishes between primary and secondary
empires: ‘The shadow empires: imperial state formation along the Chinese-Nomad frontier’, in
pp. 10-41. The Roman empire proper easily fits into the category of
primary empire, by virtue of its diversity, communication and transportation networks, use of force

Empires ed. Alcock et al
,

.

,

and unity, and the unreality of Roman India should be seen in this light. Yet late antiquity saw
the appropriation of such images by ‘empires of nostalgia’, i.e. secondary empires: see Chapter 5,
section II.
21

Chapter 5, section 1 5.
.

Bibliography

ABBREVIATIONS

ANRW
CAH

Auftieg und Niedergang der romischen Welt
Cambridge Ancient History

Cl. Phil.

Classical Philology

CQ
DNP
FGrH
JHS
JRS
L1MC

Classical Quarterly

Der Neue Pauly
Fragmente der griechischen Historiker, ed. F. Jacoby
Journal ofHellenic Studies
Journal ofRoman Studies
Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae

RAC

Reallexikon fur Antike und Christentum

RE

Realencyclopadie der Klassischen Altertumswissenschaft

TLL

Thesaurus Linguae Latinae

Abe, Stanley, ‘Inside the wonder house: Buddhist art and the West’, in Donald S.

Lopez (ed.), Curators of the Buddha: the study ofBuddhism under colonialism,
University of Chicago Press, 1995, pp. 63-106.
Abeydeera, Ananda, ‘The geographical perceptions of India and Ceylon in the
Periplus Maris Erythraei and in Ptolemy’s Geography, Terrae Cognitae 30 (1998),
1-25.

Adams, Colin, and Ray Laurence (eds.), Travel and geography in the Roman empire,
London: Routledge, 2001.
Adler, William, Time immemorial: archaic history and its sources in Christian
chronography from Julius Africanus to George Syncellus, Washington: Dumbarton Oaks, 1989.
Aerts, W. J., ‘Alexander the Great and ancient travel stories’, in Zweder von Martels
(ed.), Travelfact and travelfiction, Leiden: Brill, 1994, pp. 30-8.

Aitken, Molly Emma (ed.), Meeting the Buddha: on pilgrimage in Buddhist India,

New York: Riverhead, 1995.
Alcock, Susan E., ‘The reconfiguration of memory in the eastern Roman empire’,
in Alcock et al. (eds.), Empires, 2001, pp. 323-50.

319

,

320

Bibliography

Alcock, Susan E., Terence N. D’Altroy, Kathleen D. Morrison and Carla M.
Sinopoli (eds.), Empires: perspectives from archaeology and history

Cambridge

University Press, 2001.

Alcock, Susan E., John F. Cherry and Jas Eisner (eds.), Pausanias: travel and memory
in Roman Greece

,

Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Alexander, Philip S., ‘Notes on the imago mundi of the Book of Jubilees ', Journal

ofJewish Studies 33 (1982), 197-213.
‘Early Jewish geography’, in D. N. Freedman (ed.), Anchor Bible dictionary, vol.
II, New York and London: Doubleday, 1992,
pp. 977—88.
Allchin, F. R., ‘Upon the antiquity and methods of gold mining in ancient India’,
Journal ofthe Economic and Social History of the Orient 5 (1962), 195— 211.
Alonso-Nunez, J. M., ‘An Augustan world history: the Historiae Philippicae of
Pompeius Trogus’, Greece and Rome 34 (1987), 56-72.
‘Orosius on contemporary Spain’, in Carl Deroux (ed.), Studies in Latin literature

and Roman history vol. V, Brussels: Collection Latomus, 1989, pp. 491-507.
,

Alston, Richard, ‘Trade and the city in

Roman Egypt’, in Helen Parkins and

Christopher Smith (eds.), Trade, traders and the ancient city, London: Routledge, 1998, pp. 168-202.

Anastos, M. V., ‘The Alexandrian origin of the Christian topography of Cosmas
Indicopleustes’, Dumbarton Oaks Papers 3 (1946), 73-80.
Anderson, Benedict, Imagined communities: reflections on the origins and spread of

nationalism, rev. edn,

New York: Verso, 1991.

Anderson, Graham, The Second Sophistic: a cultural phenomenon in the Roman
Empire, London: Routledge, 1993.

Ando,

Clifford, Imperial ideology

and provincial loyalty in the Roman empire,

Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000.
Andre, Jacques, ‘La conception de l’Etat et de l’Empire dans la pensee greco-

ANRW II.30.1 (1981), 3-73.

romaine des deux premiers siecles de notre ere’,
Andre, Jacques, and Jean Filliozat, L'Inde vue de Rome

,

Paris: Belles Lettres, 1986.

Andre, Jean-Marie, and Marie-Fran9oise Baslez, Voyager dans Tantiquite,

Paris:

Fayard, 1993.

Andreassi, Mario, ‘II mimo tra “consumo” e “letteratura”: Charition e Moicheutria

Ancient Narrative 2 (2002), 30—46.
Appadurai, Arjun (ed.), The social life of things: commodities in cultural perspective,

Cambridge University Press, 1986.
Arens, William, The man-eating myth: anthropology and anthropophagy, Oxford
University Press, 1979.

CQ

Armstrong, A. H., ‘Plotinus and India’,
30 (1936), 22-28.
Asche, Ulrike, Roms Weltherrschaftsidee undAussenpolitik in der Spdtantike im Spiegel
der Panegyrici Latini, Bonn: Habelt, 1983.

and Silvio Medaglia (eds.), Erodoto. Le storie, Libro III, Milan:
Mondadori, 1990, vol. III.
Assmann, Jan, ‘Translating gods: religion as a factor of cultural (un)translatability’,
in Sanford Budick and Wolfgang Iser (eds.), The translatability of cultures,
Asheri, David,

Stanford University Press, 1996, pp. 25-36.

Bibliography

321

Astin, A. E., Cato the Censor Oxford: Clarendon, 1978.
,

Athanassiadi, Polymnia, Julian and Hellenism: an intellectual biography Oxford:
,

Clarendon, 1981.
Atkinson, John E., ‘Q. Curtius Rufus’ Historiae Alexandri Magni',

ANRW

II. 34.4

(1998), 3447-83Auberger, Janick, 'Ctesias et rOrient’, Topoi 5.2 (1995), 337-52.

Austin, N. J. E., and Boris Rankov, Exploratio: military and political intelligence
in the Roman world from the second Punic War to the Battle of Adrianople,
London: Routledge, 1995.

Badian, E., Roman imperialism in the late republic 2nd edn, Ithaca: Cornell Uni,

versity Press, 1968.

‘Nearchus the Cretan’, Yale Classical Studies 24 (1975), 147-70.

Alexander in Iran’, in Cambridge History of Iran, Cambridge University Press,
1985, vol. II, pp. 420—501.
‘Alexander at Peucelaotis’, Classical Quarterly 37 (1987), 117-38.

‘The King’s Indians’, in Will (ed.), Alexander der Grosse, 1998, pp. 205-24.
Baglivi, Nicola, ‘Osservazioni su paneg. VII(6).9’, Orpheus n.s. 7 (1986), 329-37.
Ball, Warwick, Rome in the east: the transformation ofan empire, London: Routledge,

2000.
Balsdon, J. P. V. D., Romans and aliens. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1979.
Barber, E. J. W., Prehistoric textiles Princeton University Press, 1991.
,

Barchiesi, Alessandro,

The poet and the prince: Ovid and Augustan

discourse,

Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997.
Barfield,

Thomas J., ‘The shadow empires: imperial state formation along the

Chinese-Nomad frontier’, in Alcock et al. (eds.), Empires (2001), pp. 10—41.
Barnes, Timothy D., Constantine and Eusebius Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer,

sity Press, 1981.

Barth, Fredrik (ed.), Ethnic groups and boundaries, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982.

Barton, Tamsyn, Ancient astrology, London: Routledge, 1994.
Bartsch, Shadi, Decoding the ancient novel: the reader and the role of description in

Heliodorus and Achilles Tatius, Princeton University Press, 1989.

Basham, A.

L.,

The wonder that was India,

rev.

edn,

New York: Hawthorn,

^63.
Baxter, Ron, ‘Learning from nature: lessons in virtue and vice in the Physiologus

and bestiaries’, in Colum Hourihane (ed.), Virtue and vice: the personifications
in the Index of Christian Art, Princeton University Press, 2000, pp. 29—41.

Baynham, Elizabeth, Alexander the Great: the unique history of Quintus Curtius,
Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998.
Beagon, Mary, Roman nature: the thought of Pliny the Elder, Oxford: Clarendon,
1992

-

Beard, Mary and John North (eds.), Pagan priests: religion and power in the ancient
world, London: Duckworth, 1990.

Bedini, Silvio A., The Pope’s elephant. New York: Penguin, 2000.

Bibliography

322

Begley, Vimala, The ancient port of Arikamedu:

new excavations and researches,

1989-1992, Pondichery: Ecole franfaise d’Extreme-Orient, 1996.
Begley, Vimala and Richard D. De Puma (eds.), Rome and India: the ancient sea
trade, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1991.

Bennett, Julian, Trajan, optimus princeps, 2nd edn, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2001.

Berg, Beverley, ‘Dandamis: an early Christian portrait of Indian ascetism’, CLassica
et Mediaevalia 1970 (31), 269—305.
‘The letter of Palladius on India’, Byzantion 44 (1974), 5-16.

Berggren, J. Lennart, and Alexander Jones, Ptolemy’s Geography: an annotated
translation ofthe theoretical chapters, Princeton University Press, 2000.

Berghoff, Wilhelm, Palladius, de gentibus Indiae et Bragmanibus, Meisenheim:

Hain, 1967.
Bernal, Martin, Black Athena writes back, Durham, NC: Duke University Press,

2002.
Bernard, Paul, ‘The Greek kingdoms of central Asia’, in Janos Harmatta (ed.),
History of civilizations of Central Asia, vol. II: The development of sedentary

ad 290, Paris: UNESCO, 1994, pp. 99-130.
Khanoum en Afghanistan hier (1964-1978) et aujourd’hui (2001): un site en

civilizations, yoo bc to

‘At

peril.

Perspectives d’avenir’, Comptes rendus de lAcademie des Inscriptions et

Belles-Lettres (2001), 971-1029.

Bertrand, A. C., ‘Stumbling through Gaul: maps, intelligence and Caesars Bellum

Gallicum

,

Ancient History Bulletin 11 (1997), 107-22.

Helmut, Das Alexanderreich auf prosopographischer Grundlage, 2 vols.
Munich: Beck, 1926.
Bevan, E. R., ‘India in early Greek and Latin literature’, in E. J. Rapson (ed.), The
Cambridge history ofIndia, rev. Indian repr. edn, Delhi: Chand, 1962, vol. I,
Berve,

pp. 351-83.

Der Aufbau der Historie am Bild der fremden
Lander und Volker, ihrer Zivilisation und ihrer Geschichte, Berlin: Akademie,

Bichler, Reinhold, Herodots Welt.

2000.

Bickerman, E., ‘Origines gentium’, Cl. Phil. 47 (1952), 65-81.
Bickerman, E. J., The Jews in the Greek age, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1988.

Bienkowski, Piotr, Les Celtes dans les arts mineurs greco-romains, Cracow: Polish

Academy, 1928.
Bidez, Joseph, and Franz Cumont, Les mages hellenises. Zoroastre, Ostanes et Hystaspe
d’apres la tradition grecque, Paris: Belles Lettres, 1938.

Bigwood, J. M., ‘Ctesias’ Indica and Phodus’, Phoenix 43 (1989), 302-16.
‘Ctesias’ parrot’,

CQ 43 (1993), 321-7.

‘Ctesias, his royal patrons and Indian swords’,

JHS 115 (1995), 135-40.

Bloomer, Martin W., Valerius Maximus and the rhetoric of the new nobility. Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1992.

Boardman, John, The diffusion of classical art in antiquity, Princeton University
Press, 1994.

Bibliography

323

Bongard-Levin, Grigorij M„ and Sergei Karpyuk, ‘Nachrichten iiber den Bud-

dhismus in der antiken und friihchristlichen Literatur’, in Bernd Funck (ed.),
Hellenismus: Beitrdge zur Erforschung von Akkulturation und politischer Ordnung in den Staaten des hellenistischen Zeitalters, Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck,
1996, pp. 701-12.

Bonner, Stanley F., Roman declamation in the late Republic and early Empire, Liverpool University Press, 1949.
Boorstin, Daniel J., The discoverers, New York: Random, 1983.

Bopearachchi,

Osmund, and Wilfried Pieper, Ancient coins from Sri Lanka,

Turnhout: Brepols, 1998.
Borst, Arno, Das Buch in der Naturgeschichte. Plinius und seine Leser im Zeitalter
des Pergaments, Heidelberg: Winter, 1984.

Bosch, Lourens P. van den, 'India and the apostolate of St Thomas’, in Bremmer
(ed.), The apocryphal Acts of Thomas, 2001, pp. 125-48.
Bosworth, A. B., A historical commentary on Arrian s History of Alexander, 2 vols.
Oxford: Clarendon, 1980—.
Conquest and empire: the reign of Alexander the Great, Cambridge University

Press, 1988.

From Arrian to Alexander: studies in historical interpretation, Oxford: Clarendon,
1988.
‘Aristotle, India, and the Alexander historians’, Topoi 3 (1993), 407-24.

Alexander and the East: the tragedy of triumph, Oxford: Clarendon, 1996.
‘The historical setting of Megasthenes’ Indica’, Cl. Phil. 91 (1996), 1x3-27.
‘Calanus and the Brahman opposition’, in Will (ed.), Alexander der Grosse, 1998,
pp. 173-204.

‘Augustus, the Res Gestae and Hellenistic theories of kingship’, JRS 89 (1999),
1-18.
‘

Plus <;a change

.

.

.

Ancient historians and their sources’, Classical Antiquity 22

(2003), 167-97.
Bourdieu, Pierre, Outline ofa theory ofpractice, tr. Richard Nice, Cambridge University Press, 1977.

Boussac, Marie-Framjois, and Jean-Franfois Salles (eds .), A gateway from the eastern
Mediterranean to India: the Red Sea in antiquity, Delhi: Manohar, 2004.

Bove, A., ‘Discourse’, in Frank Lentricchia and Thomas McLaughlin (eds.), Critical terms for literary study, 2nd edn, University of Chicago Press, 1995, pp.
50-65.

Bowersock, Glen W., Greek Sophists in the Roman Empire, Oxford: Clarendon,
1969.

Julian the Apostate, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978.

Roman Arabia, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1983.
‘Herodotus, Alexander, and Rome’, The American Scholar 58 (1989), 407-14.
Hellenism in late antiquity, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1990.
‘Dionysus as an epic hero’, in Hopkinson (ed.), Studies, 1994, pp. 156— 66.
‘Jacoby’s fragments and two Greek historians of pre-Islamic Arabia’, in Most
(ed.), Collecting fragments, 1997, pp. 173-85.

,

Bibliography

324

‘Philosophy and the Second Sophistic’, in Gilian Clark and Tessa Rajak (eds.),
Philosophy and power in the Greco-Roman world: essays in honour of Miriam
Griffin, Oxford: Clarendon, 2002, pp. 157-70.
Bowie, E. L., ‘Greeks and their past in the Second Sophistic’, in M. I. Finley
(ed.), Studies in ancient society, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1974,
pp. 166-209, originally in Past and Present 46 (1970), 3—41.

‘Apollonius of Tyana: tradition and reality’,

ANRW

II. 16.2

(1978), 1652-99.

Bowie, Ewen L. and Stephen J. Harrison, ‘The romance of the novel’, JRS 83
(

1993 ). 159 - 78

-

Bowman, Alan K. and Greg Woolf (eds.), Literacy and power in the ancient world,
Cambridge University Press, 1994.
‘On the Roman slave supply and slavebreeding’, in M. I. Finley
(ed.), Classical slavery, London: Frank Cass, 1987,
pp. 42-64.
Slavery and society at Rome, Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Branham, R. Bracht and Marie-Odil Goulet-Caze (eds.), The Cynics, Berkeley:
Bradley, K. R.,

University of California Press, 1996.
Braudel, Fernand, The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean world in the age of
Philip II, tr. Sian Reynolds, 2 vols., London: Collins, 1972.
Braund, David, ‘Fish from the Black Sea: classical Byzantium and the Greekness

of trade’, in John Wilks, David Harvey and Mike Dobson (eds.), Food in
antiquity, University of Exeter Press, 1995, pp. 162-70.
Breckenridge, Carol, and Peter van der Veer (eds.), Orientalism and the postcolonial

predicament: perspectives on South Asia, Philadelpia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, 1993.

Breloer, Bernhard, Kautaliya-Studien, 2 vols. Bonn: Schroeder, 1927—8.

Breloer, Bernhard, and Franz Bomer (eds.), Fontes Historiae Religionum Indicarum,

Bonn: Rohrscheid, 1939.
Bremmer, Jan, ‘Walking, standing, and sitting in ancient Greek culture’, in Jan
Bremmer and H. Roodenburg (eds.), A cultural history of gesture, Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1992, pp. 15-35.

Bremmer, Jan N. (ed.), The apocryphal Acts of Thomas, Leuven: Peeters, 2001.
Briant, Pierre, From Cyrus to Alexander: a history of the Persian empire, tr. Peter T.
Daniels, Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, 2002.
Bridges, Margaret, andj. Christoph Biirgel (eds.), The problematics ofpower: eastern

and western representations ofAlexander the Great, Bern: Lang, 1996.
Brincken, Anna-Dorothee von den, Kartographische Quellen. Welt-, See- und Regionalkarten, Turnhout: Brepols, 1988.

Brocker, Max, Aristoteles als Alexanders Lehrer in der Legende (diss. Bonn 1965).

Brodersen, Kai, ‘Neue Entdeckungen zu antiken Karten’, Gymnasium 108 (2001),
137-48.

‘The presentation of geographical knowledge for travel and transport in the

Roman world: itineraria non tantum adnotata sed etiam pictd in Adams and
Laurence (eds.), Travel and geography, 2001, pp. 7—21.
Terra cognita. Studien zur romischen Raumerfassung, 2nd edn, Hildesheim: Olms,

2003.

Bibliography

325

Brown, L. W., The Indian Christians ofSaint Thomas, Cambridge University Press,
1956.

Brown, Veter, Augustine ofHippo, London: Faber, 1967.
The making of late antiquity, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978.
The cult of the saints. University of Chicago Press, 1981.
‘The rise and function of the holy man’, in Society and the holy in late antiquity,
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982, pp. 103-52.
‘The saint as exemplar in late antiquity’, Representations 1 (1983), 1-25.
The body and society, New York: Columbia University Press, 1988.
Power and persuasion in late antiquity: towards a Christian empire, Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1992.
Brown, Truesdell S., Onesicritus, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1949.

The reliability of Megasthenes’, American Journal of Philology 76 (1955),
18-33.

The merits and weaknesses of Megasthenes’, Phoenix n (1957), 12-24.
‘Suggestions for a vita of Ctesias of Cnidos’, Historia 27 (1978), 1-19.
Brunswig, R. H., A. Parpola and D. Potts, ‘New Indus type and related seals from
the Near East in Daniel T. Potts (ed.), Dilmun: new studies in the archaeology
and early history ofBahrain, Berlin: Reimer, 1983, pp. 101-15.
,

Brunt, P. A., ‘On historical fragments and epitomes’,
(ed. and tr.), Arrian, 2 vols.

CQ 30 (1980), 477-94.

Loeb Classical Library, Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press, 1983.

Roman imperial themes, Oxford: Clarendon, 1990.
‘The bubble of the Second Sophistic’, Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies
39 (i995). 2-5-5^.

Bunbury, E. H., A history of ancient geography among the Greeks and Romans from
the earliest ages till the fall of the Roman empire, 2nd edn,

1959 [1883].
Burkert, Walter, ‘Platon oder Pythagoras?

New York: Dover,

Zum Ursprung des Wortes Philosophic’,

Hermes 88 (i960), 159-77.
Lore and science in ancient Pythagoreanism, Cambridge University Press, 1972.
Greek religion, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985.
‘Herodot als Historiker fremder Religionen’, in Herodote et les peuples non grecs,

Vandoeuvres: Fondation Hardt, 1988, pp. 1-32.
Burn, A. R., Persia and the Greeks, 2nd edn, London: Duckworth, 1984.
Burstein, Stanley M., ‘Callisthenes and Babylonian astronomy’, Echos du monde
classique 28 (1984), 71-4.

The Hellenistic age, Cambridge University Press, 1985.
Ancient African civilizations, Princeton: Markus Wiener, 1998.

Bynum, Caroline W., ‘Wonder’, American Historical Review 102 (1997), 1—26.
Cameron, Averil, Christianity and the rhetoric of empire, Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1991.

Campbell, Brian, The writings ofthe Roman land surveyors: introduction, text, translation and commentary to the Agrimensores, London: Society for the Promotion
of Roman Studies, 2000.

,

Bibliography

326

Campbell, Tony, The earliest printed maps, 1472—1500, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987.

Carandini, Andrea et al., Filosofiana, the villa of Piazza Armerina: the image of a

Roman aristocrat at the time of Constantine Palermo: Flaccovio, 1982.
,

Carey, Sorcha, Pliny’s catalogue of culture: art and empire in the Natural history,

Oxford University Press, 2003.
Carpenter, Edmund, Oh, what a blow that phantom gave me!, New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, 1973.
Carpenter, Thomas H., Dionysian imagery in Archaic Greek art, Oxford: Clarendon,

1997

-

Carrier, James G. (ed.)» Occidentalism: images ofthe west, Oxford: Clarendon, 1995.

Carriere, Jean-Claude, Evelyne Geny, Marie-Madeleine Mactoux and Fran^oise

Paul-Levy (eds.), Inde, Grece ancienne. Regards croises en anthropologie de de
Vespace. Actes de Colloque international,

Besanfon 4—5 decembre 1992, Paris:

Belles Lettres, 1995.

Carson, Anne, Eros the bittersweet, Princeton University Press, 1986.
Cary, George, The medieval Alexander, Cambridge University Press, 1956.
Cary, M., The ancient explorers, rev. by E. H. Warmington, Baltimore: Penguin,
1963.

Caseau, Beatrice, ‘Sacred landscapes’, in G.

W. Bowersock et al.

(eds.),

Late

antiquity: a guide to the postclassical world, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998, pp. 21-59.

Casson, Lionel (ed.), The Periplus Maris Erythraei, Princeton University Press, 1989.
Casson, Lionel, Ships and seafaring in ancient times Austin: University of Texas
Press, 1994.

de Certeau, Michel, The practice of everyday life, tr. Steven F. Rendall, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1984.

Chadwick, Owen, Western asceticism, Philadelphia: Westminster, 1958.

Champion, Craige B. (ed.), Roman imperialism: readings and sources, Oxford: Blackwell, 2004.

Charlesworth, J. H., The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha, Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1983, pp. 1-7.

Charlesworth, M. P., Trade routes and commerce of the Roman Empire, 2nd edn,

New York: Cooper Square, 1970.
Chaudhuri, K. N., Trade and civilisation in the Indian Ocean: an economic history

from the rise ofIslam to 1750, Cambridge University Press, 1985.
Chibnall, Marjorie, ‘Pliny’s Natural history and the Middle Ages’, in T. A. Dorey
(ed.), Empire and aftermath, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1975, pp. 57-

78.

Christ, Matthew R., ‘Herodotean kings and historical inquiry’, Classical Antiquity
13 (1994), 167-202.

Chuvin, Pierre, ‘Local traditions and classical mythology in the Dionysiaca’, in

Hopkinson (ed.), Studies, 1994, pp. 167-76.
Cimino, Rosa Maria (ed.) Ancient Rome and India: commercial and cultural contacts
,

between the Roman world and India, Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal, 1994.

,

Bibliography

327

Clark, Elizabeth A., ‘The ascetic impulse in religious
in

life:

a general response’,

Richard Valantasis and Vincent A. Wimbush (eds.), Asceticism.., Oxford:

Clarendon, 1995, pp. 505-10.
Clarke, Katherine, ‘In search of the author of Strabo’s Geography

JRS 87 (1997),

,

92-110.

Between geography and history: Hellenistic constructions of the Roman world
Oxford: Clarendon, 1999.

,

‘Universal perspectives in historiography’, in Christina Shuttleworth Kraus (ed.),

The limits of historiography: genre and narrative in ancient historical texts,
Leiden: Brill, 1999, pp. 249—79.
‘An island nation: re-reading Tacitus’ Agricold JRS 91 (2001), 94-112.
,

Clay, Diskin, and Andrea Purvis, Four island utopias, Newburyport, MA: Focus,
1999.
Clifford, James, The predicament ofculture: twentieth-century ethnography, literature

and art, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988.
Routes: travel and translation in the late twentieth century

Cambridge, MA: Har-

vard University Press, 1997.
Clifford, James, and George E. Marcus (eds.), Writing culture: the poetics andpolitics

ofethnography, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986.

Cohn, Bernard S., An anthropologist among the historians and other essays, Oxford
University Press, 1987.

Coleman, K. M., ‘Fatal charades: Roman executions staged as mythological enactments’, JRS 80 (1990), 44-73.

Coleman-Norton, P. R., ‘The authorship of the Epistola de Indicis gentibus et de
Bragmanibus' CL Phil. 21 (1926), 154-60.
Colledge, Malcolm A. R., The Parthians, New York: Praeger, 1967.
Colpe, Carsten, ‘Von Alexander dem Grossen zum Grossmongul Gehangir. Die
Frage nach einer indischen Enthellenisierung des Weltherrschaftsgedankens’,
in Glenn W. Most et al. (eds.), Philanthropia kai Eusebeia, Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1993, pp. 46—73.
Comfort, Anthony, Catherine Abadie-Reynal and Rifat Ergef
‘Crossing the
Euphrates in antiquity: Zeugma seen from space’, Anatolian Studies 50 (2000),
,

,

99-126.

Comfort, Anthony, and Rifat Ergef ‘Following the Euphrates in antiquity: northsouth routes around Zeugma’, Anatolian Studies 51 (2001), 19-49.
Conte, Gian Biagio, Genres and readers: Lucretius, love elegy, Pliny’s encyclopedia, tr.
,

Glenn W. Most, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994.
Latin literature: a history, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994.
Conze, E., ‘Buddhism and Gnosis’, in Further Buddhist studies, Oxford: Clarendon,
1975. PP- 15—32-

Coomaraswamy, Ananda

K.,

Yaksas,

New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal,

1971.

Cornell, T. J., The beginnings of Rome: Italy and Rome from the Bronze Age to the

Punic Wars (c. 1000—264 bc), London: Routledge, 1995.
Courtney, E., A Commentary on the Satires ofJuvenal, London: Athlone, 1980.

Bibliography

32-8

Cox, Patricia L„ Biography in late antiquity Berkeley: University of California
,

Press, 1983.

Craib, Raymond, ‘Cartography and power in the conquest and creation of New
Spain’, Latin American Research Review 35.1 (2000), 7—36.
Crawford, Harriet, Dilmun and its Gulf neighbours, Cambridge University Press,

1998.

Crook, J. A., ‘Political history, 30 bc to ad 14’, in CAH 2nd edn (1996), vol. X,
,

70-112.
Cunliffe, Barry, The extraordinary voyage of Pytheas the Greek, London: Penguin,
2001.

Curl, James Stevens, Egyptomania: the Egyptian revival, a recurring theme in the
history of taste, Manchester University Press, 1994.
Cutler, Anthony, ‘Originality as a cultural phenomenon’, in his Byzantium, Italy

and the north: papers on cultural relations, London: Pindar, 2000.
Dahlquist, Allan, Megasthenes and Indian religion: a study in motives and types,
Stockholm: Almqvist and Wiksell, 1962.
Dalby, Andrew, Siren feasts: a history offood and gastronomy in Greece, London:
Routledge, 1996.

Empire ofpleasures: luxury and indulgence in the Roman world, London: Routledge, 2000.

Dandamaev, M. A., A political history oftheAchaemenid empire, Leiden: Brill, 1989.
Dani, Ahmad Hasan, The historical city of Taxila, Tokyo: Centre for East Asian
Cultural Studies, 1986.

D’Arms, John H., Romans on the Bay of Naples, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1970.

Commerce and social standing in ancient Rome, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981.

Davidson, James, Courtesans andfishcakes: the consuming passions ofancient Greece,

New York: St Martin’s, 1997.
Derow, Peter, ‘Historical explanation: Polybius and his predecessors’, in Simon

Hornblower (ed.), Greek

historiography, Oxford: Clarendon, 1994, pp. 73—90.
Derrett, J. D. M., ‘The history of “Palladius on the races of India and the Brah-

mans’”, Classica et Mediaevalia 21 (i960), 64—135.

Homer in India’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society series III. 2 (1992), 47—57.
‘An Indian metaphor in St. John’s Gospel’, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society
series III. 9 (1999), 271-86.

Desreumaux, Alain and Francis Schmidt (eds.), Moise Geographe. Recherches sur les
representations juives et chretiennes de I'espace, Paris: Vrin, 1988.
Detienne, Marcel, The gardens ofAdonis: spices in Greek mythology, tr. Janet Lloyd,

Hassocks: Harvester Press, 1977.

The creation ofmythology, tr. Margaret Cook, University of Chicago Press, 1986.
Detienne, Marcel, and Jean-Pierre Vernant, The cuisine ofsacrifice among the Greeks,
tr.

Paula Wissing, University of Chicago Press, 1989.

Diamond, Jared M., Guns, germs, and steel: the fates of human societies, New York:
Norton, 1997.

,

Bibliography

329

Diggle, James, Euripidea: collected essays Oxford: Clarendon, 1994.

Dihle, Albrecht, ‘The conception of India in Hellenistic and Roman literature’,
in Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological Society 190 (1964), 15-23, repr. in

Antike und Orient pp. 89—97.
Dihle, Albrecht, Umstrittene Daten. Untersuchungen zum Auftreten der Griechen
,

am Roten Meer, Koln: Westdeutscher Verlag, 1965.
Antike und Orient. Gesammelte Aufidtze, Heidelberg: Winter, 1984.
‘Dionysos in Indien’, in Pollet (ed.), India and the ancient world, 1987, pp. 47-58.
‘Arabien

und

Indien’,

in

Herodote

et les peoples

non grecs, Entretiens

35,

Vandoeuvres: Fondation Hardt, 1990, pp. 41-61.
‘Indien

und

die

hellenistisch-romische Welt

in

der neueren

Forschung’,

Geographia antiqua 1 (1992), 151— 9.

Greek and Latin literature of the Roman empire London: Routledge, 1994.
,

‘Early Christianity in India’, in Hillard et al. (eds.), Ancient history, 1998, vol. II,

pp. 305-16.
Dihle, Albrecht, ‘Indien’,

RAC XVIII (1998), cols. 1-56.

Dilke, O. A. W., Greek and Roman maps, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1985.

‘Cartography in the Byzantine empire’, in Harley and Woodward (eds.), History

of cartography, 1987, vol. I, pp. 258-75.
‘The culmination of Greek cartography in Ptolemy’, in Harley and Woodward
(eds.), History of cartography, 1987, vol. I, pp. 177-200.

Dillon, Matthew, Pilgrims and pilgrimage in ancient Greece, London: Routledge,
1997-

Dion, Roger, Aspects politiques de
I

la

geographic antique, Paris: Belles Lettres,

977-

Dirks, Nicholas B., Castes of mind: colonialism and the making of modern India,

Princeton University Press, 2001.

Dodds, E. R., The Greeks and the irrational, Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1951.

Dognini, Cristiano, ‘Alessandro Magno e la conoscenza dell’ Iliade in India’, Aevum
7i (i997). 71-7-

Doniger O’Flaherty, Wendy (ed. and tr.), The Rig Veda, Harmondsworth: Penguin,
1981.

Doufikar-Aerts, Faustina C. W., ‘A legacy of the Alexander Romance in Arab
writings: Al-Iskandar, founder of Alexandria’, in Tatum (ed.),

The search for

the ancient novel, 1994, pp. 323—43.

Dougherty, Carol, The poetics of colonization: from city to text in Archaic Greece,

Oxford University Press, 1993.
The raft of Odysseus: the ethnographic imagination of Homer's Odyssey, Oxford
University Press, 2001.

Douglas, Mary, Purity and danger: an analysis ofthe concepts ofpollution and taboo,
rev. edn, London:

Routledge, 2002.

Doyle, Michael W., Empires, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1986.

Drew-Bear, Thomas, ‘Les voyages d’Aurelius Gaius, soldat de Diocletien’, in La
Geographic administrative et politique d’Alexandre h Mahomet. Actes du colloque

1

33 °

Bibliography
de Strasbourg, 14—16 juin 1979, Strasbourg: Centre de recherche, 1981, pp. 93141.

Droge, Arthur J., and James D. Tabor, A noble death: suicide and martyrdom among
Jews and Christians in the ancient world, San Francisco: Flarper, 1992.
Dueck, Daniela, Strabo ofAmasia: a Greek man ofletters in Augustan Rome, London:
Routledge, 2000.

Dumont, Louis, Homo Hierarchicus: the caste system and its implications University
,

of Chicago Press, 1980.

Duncan-Jones, Richard, Money and government in the Roman Empire, Cambridge
University Press, 1994.

During, Ingemar, Aristotle in the ancient biographical tradition, Goteborg University
Press, 1957.

Eadie, J. W., The Breviarium ofFestus: a critical edition with historical commentary,

London: Athlone, 1967.
The moral and political tradition ofRome, Ithaca: Cornell Univer-

Earl, Donald C.,

sity Press, 1967.

Eck, Bernard, ‘Sur la vie de Ctesias’, Revue des etudes grecques 103 (1990), 409—34.
Eco, Umberto,

A

portrait of the Elder as a Young Pliny: how to build fame’, in
Marshall Blonsky (ed.), On signs, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,

1985.

Edson, Evelyn, Mapping time and space: how medieval mapmakers viewed their
world, London: British Library, 1997.

Edwards, Catharine, The politics of immorality in ancient Rome, Cambridge University Press, 1993.

Writing Rome: textual approaches to the city, Cambridge University Press, 1996.

Edwards, Mark, and Simon Swain, (eds.), Portraits: biographical representation in
the Greek and Latin literature ofthe Roman Empire, Oxford: Clarendon, 1997.

Eggermont,

P.

H.

L., Alexander's

campaigns in Sind and Baluchistan, Leuven:

Peeters, 1975.

Alexander’s campaigns in Southern Punjab, Leuven: Peeters, 1993.
Ehlers,

Widu- Wolfgang, ‘Mit dem Monsunwind nach

Indien’,

Wiirzburger

Jahrbiicher fur Altertumswissenschaft 11 (1984), 73-84.
Elliott, J. H.,

The Old world and the new, 1492-1690, Cambridge University Press,

1970.
Eisner, Jas, ‘Pausanias: a Greek pilgrim in the Roman world’, Past and Present 135
(1992), 3-29.

Eisner, John, ‘Hagiographic geography: travel and allegory in the Life ofApollonius

of Tyana’ Journal ofHellenic Studies 117 (1997), 22-37.
,

Engels, Johannes, ‘Die Geschichte des Alexanderzuges und das Bild Alexanders

des Grossen in Strabons Geographika - Zur Interpretation der augusteischen

Kulturgeographie Strabons als Quelle seiner historischen Auffassungen’, in

Will (ed.), Alexander der Grosse, 1998, pp. 131 — 71.
Erbse, Hartmut, Fiktion und Wahrheitim Werke Herodots, Gottingen: Vandenhoeck

& Ruprecht, 1991.

Bibliography

331

Erim, K. T., ‘A new relief showing Claudius and Britannia from Aphrodisias’,
Britannia 13 (1982), 277-81.
Errington, Elizabeth, and Joe Cribb (eds.), The crossroads ofAsia: transformations in

image and symbol in the art of ancient Afghanistan and Pakistan, Cambridge:
Ancient India and Iran Trust, 1992.

Euben, Roxanne L., The comparative politics of travel’. Parallax 9.4 (2003), 18-28.
Fabian, Johannes, Time and the Other: how anthropology makes its object. New York:

Columbia University Press, 1983.
Fa-Hsien, A record ofBuddhist kingdoms: being an account by the Chinese monk FaHien of his travels in India and Ceylon (ad 399-414) in search of the Buddhist
books ofdiscipline, tr. James Legge, repr. edn, San Francisco: Harper, 1975.
Fairweather, J. A., ‘Fiction in the biographies of ancient writers’, Ancient Society 5
(1974), 231-75.
Faller, Stefan,

Taprobane im Wandel der Zeit. Das Sri-Lanka-Bild in griechischen und

lateinischen Quellen zwischen Alexanderzug und Spdtantike, Stuttgart: Steiner,

2000.
Favro, Diane, The urban image of Augustan Rome, Cambridge University Press,

I99 6

-

Fehling, Detlev, Diesieben Weisen und die griechische Chronologie, Bern: Lang, 1985.

Herodotus and his ‘sources’, tr. J. G. Howie, Leeds: Cairns, 1989.
Feldman, Louis H Jew and gentile in the ancient world, Princeton University Press,
.

,

1993-

Fentress, James and Chris Wickham, Social memory, Oxford: Blackwell, 1992.

Fiaccadori, Gianfranco, ‘Teofilo Christiano’, Studi classici e orientali 33 (1983), 295331 and 34 (1984), 271-308.
Filliozat, Jean, ‘La valeur des connaissances greco-romaines sur Find t , Journal des

savants (1981), 97-135.

Finegan, Jack,

An archaeological history of religions of Indian Asia, New York:

Paragon, 1989.

The ancient economy, 2nd edn, Berkeley: University of California

Finley, Moses I.,
Press, 1985.

Fisher, Nick, ‘Drink, hybris and the promotion of harmony in Sparta’, in Anton

Powell (ed.), Classical Sparta: techniques behind her success, London: Routledge, 1989, pp. 26-50.

Flach, Dieter, ‘Die Germania des Tacitus in ihrem literaturgeschichtlichen Zusam-

menhang’, in Herbert Jankuhn and Dieter Timpe (eds.), Beitrdge zum
Ruprecht,
Verstdndnis der Germania des Tacitus, Gottingen: Vandenhoeck

&

1989, pp. 27-58.

Flinterman, Jaap-Jan, Power, paideia and Pythagoreanism: Greek identity, conceptions

of the relationship between philosophers and monarchs and political ideas in
Philostratus Life of Apollonius, Amsterdam: Gieben, 1995.
’

Flintoff, Everard, ‘Pyrrho and India’, Phronesis 25 (1980), 88—108.

X

Fogen, Marie-Therese, Die Enteignung der Wahrsage. Studienzum kaiserlichen Wissensmonopol in der Spdtantike, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1993.

Bibliography

332.

Foucault, Michel, The order of things: an archaeology of the human sciences. New
York: Vintage, 1973.

‘What is an author?’ in David Lodge (ed.), Modern criticism and theory, London:
Longman, 1988, pp. 197-210.
Discipline and punish: the birth of the prison, tr. Alan Sheridan, 2nd edn,

New

York: Vintage, 1995.

Fowden, Garth, ‘The pagan holy man in late antique society’, JRS 102 (1982),

33 59

-

Empire to commonwealth: consequences ofmonotheism in late antiquity, Princeton
University Press, 1993.
Fowler, Robert, ‘Herodotus and his contemporaries’, JHS 116 (1996), 62—87.
Fraser, P. M., Ptolemaic Alexandria, 3 vols., Oxford: Clarendon, 1972.
Cities ofAlexander the Great, Oxford: Clarendon, 1996.

Fraser,

M., ‘The world of Theophrastus’, in Simon Hornblower (ed.), Greek

P.

historiography, Oxford: Clarendon, 1994, pp. 167-92.
Friedlander, Paul, Plato, New York: Meridian, 1958.

Frugoni, Chiara, La fortuna di Alessandro

magno dall’ Antichita al Medioevo,

Florence: La nuova Italia, 1978.
Gabba, Emilio, Greek knowledge ofJews up to Hecataeus ofAbdera, Berkeley: Center
for Hermeneutical Studies in Hellenistic and Modern Culture, 1981.
‘True history and false history in classical antiquity’,/^ 71 (1981), 50-62.
Galinsky, G. Karl, The Herakles theme: the adaptations of the hero in literature from

Homer to the twentieth century, Totowa: Rowman and Littlefield, 1972.
Augustan culture: an interpretative introduction, Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1996.

Gallazzi, C.,

and B. Kramer, ‘Artemidor im Zeichensaal’, Archiv fur Papyrus-

forschung 44 (1998), 189-208.

Garnsey, P. D. A., Ideas ofslavery in antiquity, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Garnsey, Peter and Richard Sailer, The Roman empire: economy, society and culture,
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987.
Garzetti, Albino, From Tiberius to the Antonines, London: Methuen, 1974.

Geertz, Clifford, The interpretation of cultures: selected essays, 2nd edn, New York:
Basic, 2000.

Gerini, G. E., Researches on Ptolemy’s Geography ofEastern Asia (Farther India and

Indo-Malay Peninsula), London: Royal Asiatic Society, 1909.
Geus, Klaus, Eratosthenes von Kyrene. Studien zur hellenistischen Kultur- und Wissenschaftsgeschichte, Munich: Beck, 2002.
van Geytenbeek, A. C., Musonius Rufus and Greek diatribe, Assen: Van Gorcum,
1963.

Giardina, Andrea, ‘The merchant’, in Andrea Giardina (ed.), The Romans, tr. Lydia

G. Cochrane, University of Chicago Press, 1993, pp. 245-71.
Gleason, Maud, Making men: sophists and selfpresentation in ancient Rome, Prince-

ton University Press, 1995.
le Goff, Jacques,

Time, work and culture in the Middle Ages, tr. Arthur Goldhammer,

University of Chicago Press, 1980.

Bibliography

333

Goldenberg, David M., The curse ofHam: race and slavery in early Judaism, Christianity and Islam, Princeton University Press, 2003.

Goldhill, Simon (ed.), Being Greek under Rome: cultural identity, the Second Sophistic

and the development ofempire Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Goldsmith, R. W., ‘An estimate of the size and structure of the national product
,

of the early Roman empire’, Review ofIncome and Wealth 30 (1984), 263-88.
Good, Deirdre Joy, Reconstructing the tradition of Sophia in Gnostic Literature,
Atlanta: Scholars Press, 1987.

Goodman, M. D., ‘Texts, scribes and power in Roman Judaea’, in Bowman and
Woolf, Literacy and power, 1994, pp. 99-108.
Gopal, L., ‘Textiles in ancient India’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of
the Orient 4 (1961), 42-64.

Gordon, R. L., ‘The sacred geography of a mithraeum the example of Sette Sfere’,
:

Journal ofMithraic Studies 1 (1976), 119-65.

Gordon, R. L., ‘Reality, evocation and boundaries in the Mysteries of Mithras’,
Journal of Mithraic Studies 3 (1980), 19-99.
Gould, Peter, and Rodney White, Mental maps, 2nd edn, Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1986.

Gormley, C. M., M. A. Rouse and R. H. Rouse, ‘The medieval circulation of the
“de chorographia” of Pomponius Mela’, Medieval Studies 46 (1984), 266-320.
Gosden, Chris and Yvonne Marshall, ‘The cultural biography of objects’, World
Archaeology 31 (1999), 169—78.

Gould, John, ‘Herodotus and religion’, in Hornblower (ed.), Greek historiography,
1994, pp. 91-106.

Graeven, Hans, ‘Darstellung der Inder in antiken Kunstwerken’, Jahrbuch des
deutschen archdologischen Instituts (Berlin) 15 (1900), 195-2x8.
Graf, Fritz, Magic in the ancient world, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1997.

Grafton, Anthony, Forgers and critics: creativity and duplicity in western scholarship,

Princeton University Press, 1990.

New worlds, ancient texts: the power oftradition and the shock ofdiscovery. Harvard:
Belknap, 1992.

Green, Peter, ‘Caesar and Alexander: aemulatio, imitatio, comparand American
,

Journal ofAncient History 3 (1978), 1—26.

Alexander to Actium: the historical evolution of the Hellenistic age, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.

Greenblatt, Stephen, Renaissance self-fashioning from More to Shakespeare, University of Chicago Press, 1980.

Marvelous possessions: the wonder ofthe New World, University of Chicago Press,
1991

-

Griffin, Jasper, Latin poets and Roman life. Chapel Hill: University of North Car-

olina Press, 1986.

Groseclose, Barbara, ‘Imag(in)ing Indians’, Art History 13.4 (1990), 488-515.

Gruen, Erich S., The Hellenistic world and the coming ofRome, Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1984.

,

,

Bibliography

334

‘Cultural fictions and cultural identity’, Transactions ofthe American Philological

Assocation 123 (1993), 1-14.

‘The expansion of the empire under Augustus’, CAH 2nd edn (1996), vol. IX,
,

pp. 148-96.

‘Rome and the myth of Alexander’, in Hillard et al. (eds.), Ancient history, 1998,
vol. I, pp. 178-91.
Giingerich, Rudolf, Die Kiistenbeschreibung in der griechischen Literatur, Munster:

Aschendorff, 1950.

Gupta, Dipankar (ed.) Social stratification, Oxford University Press, 1992.
Gurval, Robert Alan, Actium and Augustus, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
,

Press, 1995.

Guthrie, W. K. C ., A history of Greek philosophy, 6 vols., Cambridge University
Press, 1962-81.

The Sophists, Cambridge University Press, 1971.
Habinek, Thomas, The politics of Roman poetry, Princeton University

Press,

1998.

‘Ovid and empire’, in Philip Hardie (ed.), The Cambridge companion to Ovid

Cambridge University Press, 2002, pp. 46-61.
Hagg, Tomas, The novel in antiquity, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983.
‘Callirhoe

and Parthenope: the beginnings of the historical novel’,

Classical

Antiquity 6 (1985), 184-204.
‘Hierocles the lover of truth and Eusebius the Sophist’, Symbolae Osloenses 6y
(1992), 138-50.

Hahn, Thomas, ‘The Indian tradition in western medieval intellectual history’,
Viator 9 (1978), 213-34.
Halbfass, Wilhelm, India and Europe: an essay in understanding, Albany:

SUNY

Press, 1988.

Hall, Edith, Inventing the barbarian: Greek self definition through tragedy, Oxford:

Clarendon, 1989.
Hall, Jonathan M., Ethnic identity in Greek antiquity, Cambridge University Press,

1997.
Hellenicity: between ethnicity and culture, University of Chicago Press, 2002.

Hallo, William W., ‘On the antiquity of Sumerian Wter&ture Journal of the Amer,

ican Oriental Society 83 (1963), 167-76.

Hanaway, William L., ‘Eskandar-nama’, Encyclopaedia Iranica (1998), vol. VIII,
pp. 609-12.

Hanger, Christian, Die Welt im Kopf. Raumbilder und Strategic im Romischen Kaiserreich, Gottingen: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht, 2001.

Hardie, Philip R., Virgil’s Aeneid: cosmos and imperium, Oxford: Clarendon, 1986.

Hardt, Michael and Antonio Negri, Empire Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2000.

Harl,

Kenneth W., Coinage in the Roman economy, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1996.

Harley, J. B., and David Woodward (eds.), History of cartography, University of

Chicago Press, 1987, vol. I.

Bibliography

335

Harrauer, H., and P. Sijpesteijn, ‘Ein neues Dokument zu Roms Indienhandel, P.

Vindob. G40822’, Anzeiger der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschafien,
phil.-hist. Kl. 122 (1985), 124-55.

Harris, W. V., War and imperialism in republican Rome, 327—70 bc, Oxford: Claren-

don, 1979.
Harris, W. V., ‘Toward a study of the Roman slave trade’, Memoirs ofthe American

Academy in Rome 36 (1980), 1x7-40.
Harrison, Mark, Climates and constitutions Oxford University Press, 1999.
,

Hartog, Francois, The mirror of Herodotus: the representation of the other in the
writing of history tr. Janet Lloyd, Berkeley: University of California Press,
,

1988.

Hartog, Francois, Memories of Odysseus: frontier tales from ancient Greece, tr. Janet
Lloyd, University of Chicago Press, 2001.

Hatzopoulos, M. B., ‘Alexandre en Perse: la revanche et l’empire’, Zeitschrifi fur
Papyrologie und Epigrafik 116 (1997), 41-52.

Hauser, Stephan R., ‘Orientalismus’,

DNP XV.i (2001) cols. 1233-43.

Hawkes, Jacquetta, Adventurer in archaeology: the biography ofSir Mortimer Wheeler,

New York: St Martin’s, 1982.
Healy, John

F.,

Pliny the elder on science and technology, Oxford: Clarendon,

1999.

Heckel, Waldemar, The marshals ofAlexander’s empire, London: Routledge, 1992.
Heckel,

W. and J. Yardley, ‘Roman writers and the Indian practice of suttee’,

Philologus 125 (1981), 305-11.

Henkel, Nikolaus, Studien zum Physiologus im Mittelalter, Tubingen: Niemeyer,
19-76.

Helms, Mary W., Craft and the kingly ideal: art, trade, andpower, Austin: University
of Texas Press, 1993.
Heuss, A., ‘Alexander der Grosse und die politische Ideologic des Altertums’, Antike

und Abendland 4 (1954), 65-104.
Hillard, T. W., R. A. Kearsley, C. E. V. Nixon and A.

M. Nobbs (eds.), Ancient

history in a modem university, 2 vols., North Ryde,

NSW, and Grand Rapids,

MI: Macquarie University Press and Eerdmans, 1998.
Hinz, Walther, ‘Darius und der Suezkanal’, Archdologische Mitteilungen aus Iran 8
(1975), 115-21.

Hitchner, Bruce, ‘The merits and challenges of an Annaliste approach to archaeology’, journal ofRoman Archaeology 7 (1994), 408-17.

Hobsbawm, E. J., The age ofempire, 1873-1914, New York: Pantheon, 1987.
Hobsbawm, E. J. and Terence Ranger (eds.), The invention oftradition, Cambridge
University Press, 1983.

Hodder, Ian (ed.), The meaning of things: material culture and symbolic expression,
London: Unwin Hyman, 1989.
Hohlkeskamp, Karl-J., ‘Arbitrators, lawgivers and the codification oflaw in Archaic
Greece: problems and perspectives’, Metis 7 (1992), 49-81.
Holt, Frank L., Thundering Zeus: the making of Hellenistic Bactria, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.

,

,

Bibliography

336

Into the land of bones: Alexander the Great in Afghanistan, Berkeley: University

of California Press, 2005.

van Hooff, Anton J L. From autothanasia to suicide: self-killing in classical antiquity
.

,

London: Routledge, 1990.
Hopkinson, Neil (ed.), Studies in the Dionysiaca ofNonnus, Cambridge: Cambridge
Philological Society, 1994.

Horden, Peregrine, and Nicholas Purcell, The corrupting sea: a study of Mediterranean history Oxford: Blackwell, 2000.
Hornblower, Simon, ‘Sources and their uses’,
,

CAH, 2nd edn (1994), vol. VI,

pp. 1-23.

How, W. W., andj. Wells, A commentary on Herodotus, 2 vols., Oxford: Clarendon,
1912.

Howgego, Christopher, The supply and use of money in the Roman world 200
bc to ad 300 Journal ofRoman Studies 82 (1992), 1-32.
Huber, Paul, Heilige Berge: Sinai Athos, Golgota — Ikonen, Freshen, Miniaturen, 2nd
,

edn, Zurich: Benziger, 1982.
Hiibner, Wolfgang, ‘The Ptolemaic view of the universe’, Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies 41 (2000), 59-93.

Huff, Darrell, How to lie with statistics, 2nd edn, New York: Norton, 1993.
Hughes, Diane Owen, and Thomas R. Trautmann (eds.), Time: histories and ethnographies, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995.
Humphreys, Sally, ‘Law, custom and culture in Herodotus’, Arethusa 20 (1987),

211-20.

Hunt, E. D., Holy Land pilgrimage in the later Roman empire Oxford: Clarendon,
1982.

Huntington, Samuel P., Clash of civilisations and the remaking of the world order.

New York: Simon and Schuster, 1996.
Huntington, Susan L., The art ofancient India: Buddhist, Hindu, Jain, New York:
Weatherhill, 1985.
I-ching, Chinese monks in India: biography ofeminent monks who went to the western

world in search ofthe law during the great T’angdynasty, tr. Latika Lahiri, Delhi:
Motilal Benarsidass, 1986.

Inden, Ronald B., Imagining India, Oxford: Blackwell, 1990.
Irmscher, Johannes, ‘Sulle origine del concetto Romania’, in Populi e Spazio Romano
tra Diritto e Profezia, Naples: Edizione Scientifiche, 1986, pp. 421-9.

Isaac,

Benjamin H., The limits of empire: the Roman army in the east, rev. edn,

Oxford: Clarendon, 1992.
Isaac, Benjamin H.,

The invention of racism in classical antiquity, Princeton Uni-

versity Press, 2004.

Jacob, Christian, ‘Alexandre et

la

maitrise de l’espace. L’art

du voyage dans

l’<<Anabase>> d’Arrien’, Quaderni di Storia 34 (1991), 5-40.
L ’Empire de Cartes: approaches theoretique de la cartography it travers Thistoire.
Paris: Michel, 1992.

‘Mapping the mind: the earth from ancient Alexandria’, in D. Cosgrove (ed.),
Mappings, London: Consortium, 1999, pp. 24-49.

Bibliography

337

Jacobs, Bruno, Die Satrapienverwaltung im Perserreich zur Zeit Darius III,

TAVO

Beihefte B87, Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1994.
Janni, Pietro, La Mappa e il Periplo, Rome: Bretschneider, 1984.

Jenkins, Richard, ‘Rethinking ethnicity: identity, categorization and power’, Ethnic

and Racial Studies 17 (1994), 199-223.
Jennison, George, Animals for show and pleasure in ancient Rome, Manchester
University Press, 1937.
Jones, A. H. M., ‘The Asian trade in antiquity’, in The Roman economy: studies in

ancient economic and administrative history, Oxford: Blackwell, 1974, pp. 140—
50.

Jones, A. H. M., The later Roman empire, 284—602: a social, economic and administrative survey, 2 vols., Oxford; Blackwell, 1964.

Jones, C. P., The Roman world ofDio Chrysostom Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni,

versity Press, 1978.

Kinship diplomacy in the ancient world, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1999.

‘Apollonius of Tyana’s passage to India’, Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies 42
(2001), 185-99.

de Jong, J. W., ‘The discovery of India by the Greeks’, Asiatische Studien 27 (1973),
115-43.

Kamos, David, ‘On Apollonius, Pythagoras and the Jaina vision’, inK. J. Boudouris
(ed.), Ionian philosophy, Athens: International Association for Greek Philos-

ophy, 1989, pp. 211-17.

Karttunen, Klaus, ‘The country of fabulous beasts and naked philosophers: India
in classical and medieval literature’, Arctos 21 (1987), 43-52.
India in early Greek literature, Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society, 1989.

India and the Hellenistic world, Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society, 1997.

‘The ethnography of the fringes’, in Egbert J. Bakker et al. (eds.), Brill’s com-

panion to Herodotus, Leiden: Brill, 2002, pp. 457—74.
Robert A., ‘Controlling reason: declamation in rhetorical education at

Raster,

Rome’, in Yun Lee Too (ed .), Education in Greek and Roman antiquity, Leiden:
Brill,

2001, pp. 317-37.

Keller, O., Die antike Tierwelt, 2 vols., Leipzig: Teubner, 1920.

Kennedy, David et al The twin towns ofZeugma on the Euphrates: rescue work and
historical studies, Portsmouth, RI: JRA supplement 27, 1998.
Kennedy, Duncan F., ‘“Augustan” and “anti-Augustan”: reflections on terms of
,

reference’, in Anton Powell (ed.), Roman poetry and propaganda in the age of

Augustus, London: Routledge, 1992, pp. 26—58.

The arts of love: five studies in the discourse of Roman love elegy, Cambridge
University Press, 1993.

Kennedy, George A., Greek rhetoric under Christian emperors, Princeton University
Press, 1983.

A new history ofclassical rhetoric, Princeton University Press, 1994.
Kent, Roland G., Old Persian, 2nd edn, New Haven: AOS, 1953.
Kerferd, G. B., ‘The first Greek sophists’, Classical Review 64 (1950), 8-10.

Bibliography

338

‘What does the wise man know?’ in John M. Rist (ed.), The Stoics, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1978, pp. 125-36.
Kienast, Dietmar, ‘Augustus und Alexander’, Gymnasium 76 (1969), 43-56.

Kindstrand, Jan Fredrik, ‘The Greek concept of proverbs’, Eranos 76 (1978), 71—85.
Kirk, G. S., and J. E. Raven, The Presocratic philosophers

,

Cambridge University

Press, 1957.

Kitamura, Kunio, ‘Cosmas Indicopleustfes et la figure de la terre’, Desreumaux and

Schmidt (eds.), in Moise Geographe, pp. 79-98.
F. J., The Acts of Thomas: introduction, text, and commentary, 2nd edn,

Klijn, A.

Leiden: Brill, 2003.
Klingenberg, Georg, ‘Imperium’, RAC XVII (1996), cols. 1121-42.

Koch, Guntram, Friihchristliche Sarkophage, Munich: Beck, 2000.
Konstan, David, ‘Persians, Greeks and empire’, Arethusa 20.1—2 (1987), 59—73.
Koster, W. J. W., ‘Chaldaer’,

RAC II (1954), cols. 1006-21.

Kramer, B. ‘The earliest known map of Spain (?) and the geography of Artemidorus
of Ephesus on papyrus’, Imago Mundi 53 (2001), 115—20.
Kramer, Norbert, ‘Das Itinerar Xra6p,oi FlapOiKoi des Isidor von Charax ,

Beschreibung eines Handelsweges?’ Klio 85 (2003), 120—30.
Krueger, Derek, Symeon the holy fool, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.

‘The bawdy and society: the shamelessness of Diogenes in

Roman imperial

culture’, in Branham and Goulet-Caze (eds.), The Cynics,
pp. 222-39.
Kuhrt, Amelie, The ancient Near East, c. 3000-300 bc, 2 vols., London: Routledge,

1994.

Kulke, Hermann, and Dietmar Rothermund, A history ofIndia, 3rd edn, London:

Routledge, 1998.

Kurke, Leslie, ‘The politics of habrosune in archaic Greece’, Classical Antiquity 11
(1992), 81-120.

Kurz, Otto, ‘Cultural relations between Parthia and Rome’, Cambridge History of
Iran, vol. III.i (1983), pp. 559-67.

Kytzler, Bernhard (ed.), Roma Aeterna, Zurich: Artemis, 1972.

Lach, Donald F., Asia in the making of Europe, University of Chicago Press, 1965,
vol. I.

Lambert, W. G., Babylonian wisdom literature, Oxford: Clarendon, i960.

Lane Fox, R. J., ‘The Itinerary of Alexander: Constantius to Julian’, CQ 47 (1997),
239-52.
Lardinois, Andre, ‘The wisdom and wit of many: the orality of Greek proverbial
expressions’, in Janet Watson (ed.), Speaking volumes: orality and literacy in

the Greek and Roman world, Leiden: Brill, 2001, pp. 93—108.
Lassen, Christian [us], ‘De nominibus, quibus a veteribus appellantur Indorum

philosophi’, Rheinisches Museum 1 (1833), 171—90.

Indische Alterthumskunde, 5 vols., Leipzig: Kittler, 1856-62.
Lateiner, Donald,

The historical method ofHerodotus, University of Toronto Press,

1989.

Lecoq, Danielle, ‘L’image d’Alexandre a travers
e

e

les

mappemondes medievales

(XII -XIII )’, Geographia antiqua 2 (1993), 63-103.

,

Bibliography

339

Lefkowitz, Mary R., Lives of the Greek poets London: Duckworth, 1981.
,

Lenfant, Dominique, ‘L’Inde de Ctesias’, Topoi 5 (1990), 309-36.
(ed. and comm.), Ctesias de Cnide, La Perse, I’Inde Paris: Belles Lettres, 2004.

Lenski, Noel, 'Lnitium mali Romano populo contemporary reactions to the Battle
:

of Adrianople’, Transactions ofthe American Philological Association 127 (1997),
129-68.
Failure ofempire: Valens and the Roman state in the fourth century AD, Berkeley:

University of California Press, 2002.

Lepper, F. A., Trajan’s Parthian war Oxford: Clarendon, 1948.
,

Lesley, Albin,

A history of Greek literature, London: Routledge, 1966.

Lestringant, Frank, Cannibals: the discovery and representation of the cannibalfrom

Columbus to Jules Verne, tr. Rosemary Morris, Oxford: Polity, 1997.
Levy, Isidore, La legende de Pythagore en Grece en Palestine, Paris: Champion, 1927.
Lewis, Martin W. and Karen E. Wigen, The myth of continents: a critique of metageography, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997.
Lightfoot, C. S., ‘Trying to rescue Zeugma’ Journal ofRoman Archaeology 14 (2001),
,

643-8.
Lincoln, Bruce, Authority: construction and corrosion. University of Chicago Press,
1994.

Lindegger, Peter, Griechische und romische Quellen zum periphdren Tibet, 3 vols.,
Zurich: Libresso, 1979-93.
Lintott, A. W., ‘Imperial expansion and moral decline in the Roman Republic’,

Historia 21 (1972), 626-38.

Lmperium Romanum: politics and administration, London: Routledge, 1993.
Lloyd, A. B., Herodotus, Book II: introduction, Leiden: Brill, 1975.

Lloyd, G. E. R., Polarity and analogy; two types of argumentation in early Greek
thought, Cambridge University Press, 1966.

Greek science after Aristotle, New York: Norton, 1973.
Science, folklore and ideology: studies in the life sciences in ancient Greece, Cam-

bridge University Press, 1983.
Revolutions in wisdom, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1987.

Demystifying mentalities Cambridge University Press, 1990.
,

Long, A. A., ‘Socrates in Hellenistic philosophy’, CQ 38 (1988), 150—71.

‘The Socratic tradition: Diogenes, Crates and Hellenistic ethics’, in Branham

and Goulet-Caze (eds.), The Cynics, 1994, pp. 28-46.
Lovejoy, Arthur O, and George Boas, Primitivism and related ideas in antiquity,
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1935.

Lowenthal, David, The past is a foreign country, Cambridge University Press,
1985.

Lozovsky, Natalia, ‘The earth is our book’: geographical knowledge in the Latin West,
ca. 400—1000,

Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2000.

Luce, T. J., ‘Ancient views on the causes of bias in historical writing’, Classical
Philology 84 (1989), 16—31.

Lund, Allan A.., Zum Germanenbild der Romer. Eine Einfuhrung in die antike Ethnographic, Heidelberg: Winter, 1990.

34 °

Bibliography

Lund, Allan A., ‘Versuch einer Gesamtinterpretation der Germania des Tacitus’,

ANRW II.33.3

(I

I )>

PP- 1858-988.

99
Luttwak, Edward N., The grand strategy of the Roman empire from the first century

ad to the third, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974.
McCann, Anna Marguerite, Roman sarcophagi in the Metropolitan Museum ofArt,

New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1978.
MacCormack, Sabine, ‘Latin prose panegyrics’, in T. A. Dorey (ed.), Empire and
aftermath: Silver Latin II, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1975, pp. 143—
205.

Art and ceremony in late antiquity, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981.
‘

Loca sancta: the organisation of sacred topography in late antiquity’, in Robert

Ousterhout (ed.). The blessings ofpilgrimage, Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1990, pp. 7-40.

McCoskey, Denise Eileen, ‘By any other name? Ethnicity and the study of ancient
identity’, Classical Bulletin 79 (2003), 93-109.
Macdonald, W. A., and J. A. Pinto, Hadrian Villa and its legacy. New Haven: Yale
’s

University Press, 1995.

Macdonnell, Arthur A. (ed.), A Vedic reader for students Oxford University Press,
,

1917.

Macfie, Alexander Lyon (ed.), Orientalism: a reader. New York University Press,

2000.

MacLeod, Roy (ed.), The Library of Alexandria: centre of learning in the ancient
world, London: Tauris, 2000.
Mahadevan, I., ‘Tamil-Brahmi graffito’, in S. E. Sidebotham and W. Z. Wendrich
(eds.), Berenike ippy. preliminary report of the ippp excavations at Berenike
(Egyptian Red Sea coast), Leiden: CNWS, 1996, pp. 206-8.
Majeed, Javed, ‘Comparativism and references to Rome in British imperial attitudes

to India’, in Catharine Edwards (ed.), Roman presences: receptions ofRome in
European culture, iyp8—ip4y Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Majumdar, Ramesh Chandra, The classical accounts ofIndia, Calcutta: Mukhopad-

hyay, i960.

Marcus, George E., Anthropology as cultural critique, University of Chicago Press,
1986.

Marincola, John, Authority and tradition in ancient historiography, Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Marks, John H., Visions of one world: legacy of Alexander, Guilford, CT: Four
Quarters, 1985.

Markus, R. A., The end ofancient Christianity, Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Marrou, Henri Irenee, A history of education in antiquity tr. George Lamb,
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1956.
,

Marshall, Sir John Hubert, A guide to Taxila, Cambridge University Press, i960.
Martels, Zweder von (ed.), Travel fact and travel fiction: studies on fiction, literary
tradition, scholarly discovery and observation in travel writing, Leiden: Brill,

1994.

Bibliography

341

Martin, Dale B., Inventing superstition: from the Hippocratics to the Christians,

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2004.
Martin, Richard P., ‘The Seven Sages as performers ofwisdom’, in Carol Dougherty
and Leslie Kurke (eds.), Cultural poetics in archaic Greece, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993, pp. 108-28.

Martin, Richard P., ‘The Scythian accent: Anacharsis and the Cynics’, in Branham

and Goulet-Caze (eds.), The Cynics, 1996, pp. 136-55.
Martin, Victor, ‘Un recueil de diatribes cyniques Pap. Genev. inv. 271’, Museum

Helveticum 16 (1959), 77-115.

Mason, P., ‘Notes on cormorant-fishing: Europe and its other’, Ibero-Amerikanisches
Archiv NF 13 (1987), 147-74.

Mattern, Susan P., Rome and the enemy: imperial strategy in the Principate, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1999.

Matthews, John, The Roman Empire ofAmmianus, London: Duckworth, 1989.
Matthews, Thomas F., Byzantium from antiquity to the Renaissance, New York:

Abrams, 1998.
Mattingly, D. J. (ed.), Dialogues in Roman imperialism: power, discourse and discrepant experience in the Roman empire (Portsmouth, RI: Journal of Roman

Archaeology, Supplementary series no. 23, 1997).

Mattingly Harold, Coins ofthe Roman empire in the British Museum. Vol. Ill, Nerva
to Hadrian, London: British

Museum, 1936.

Matz, Friedrich, Die Dionysischen Sarkophage, 4 vols., Berlin: Mann, 1968-75.

Mayerson, Philip, ‘A confusion of Indias: Asian India and African India in the
Byzantine sources ', Journal of the American Oriental Society 113 (1993), 169—
74-

Mazzarino, Santo, ‘On the name of the Hipalus ( Hippalus) wind in Pliny’, in F. de

Romanis and A. Tchernia (eds.), Crossings: early Mediterranean contact with
India, Delhi: Manohar, 1997, pp. 72-9.

Meredith, D., ‘Annius Plocamus: two inscriptions from the Berenice road’, JRS 43
(i953). 38-40.

Merkelbach, Reinhold, Die Quellen des griechischen Alexanderromans, 2nd edn,

Munich: Beck, 1977.
Meuli,

Karl,

Odyssee

und Argonautika.

Untersuchungen

zur

griechischen

Sagengeschichte und zum Epos, Berlin: Weidmann, 1921.

Meyendorff, J., ‘Wisdom-Sophia: contrasting approaches to a complex theme’,

Dumbarton Oaks Papers 41 (1987), 391-401.
Mignolo, Walter D., The darker side of the Renaissance: literacy, territoriality and
colonization, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995.

The Roman empire and its neighbours, 2nd edn, New York:
Holmes and Meier, 1981.
The Roman Near East, 3/ bc-ad 337, Cambridge, MA: Harvard

Millar, Fergus et al.,

Millar, Fergus,

University Press, 1993.

‘Caravan cities: the Roman Near East and long-distance trade by land’, in Michel
Austin, Jill Harries and Christopher Smith (eds.), Modus operandi: essays in

34 2

Bibliography

honour of Geoffrey Rickman, London: Institute of Classical Studies, 1998,

PP-H 9-37

-

‘Looking east from the classical world’, International History Review 20.3 (1998),
507-31.
Miller, J. Innis,

The spice trade of the Roman empire, Oxford: Clarendon, 1969.

Miller, Konrad, Itineraria Romana. Romische Reisewege an der hand der Tabula

Peutingeriana, Stuttgart: Strecker und Schroder, 1916.

Milns, R. D., ‘Greek writers on India before Alexander’, Australian Journal of
Politics and History 35 (1989), 353-63.

Mingana, A., ‘The early spread of Christianity in India’, Bulletin ofthe John Rylands
Library 10 (1926), 435—96.
Miquel, A. (ed.), Usctma Ibn Mundiqh, Des Enseignements de la Vie, Paris: Colin,
1983.

Mitchiner, John E.,

Traditions

of the Seven

Rsis,

Delhi: Motilal Benarsidass,

1982.

Mitter, Partha, Much maligned monsters: history ofEuropean reactions to Indian art,

Oxford: Clarendon, 1977.
Moles, J.

L.,

‘The career and conversion of Dio Chrysostom’, JHS 98 (1978),

79-100.

Momigliano, Arnaldo, ‘II razionalismo di Ecateo di Mileto’, Atene et Roma n.s. 12
(1931), 15-44.

Studies in historiography, London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1966.
‘Fattori orientali della storiografia ebraica post-esilica e della storiografia greca’,

Terzo Contributo alia Storia degli Studi classici e del Mondo antico,

Rome:

Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura, 1966 [1965], vol. II, pp. 807—18.
‘Tradizione e invenzione in Ctesia’, in Quarto Contributo (Rome: Edizione di
Storia e Letteratura, 1969 [1931]), pp. 181-212.
Alien wisdom: the limits ofHellenization, Cambridge University Press, 1975.
Essays in ancient and modern historiography, Oxford: Blackwell, 1977.

‘The historians of the ancient world and their audiences: some suggestions’,

Annali di Scuola Normale di Pisa 8 (1978), 59-75.

Mommsen, Theodor, Das romische Staatsrecht, 3 vols., 3rd edn, Leipzig: Hirzel,
1877.

Mommsen, Theodor E., Medieval and Renaissance studies, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1959.

Monmonier, Mark, How to lie with maps, 2nd edn, University of Chicago Press,
1996.

Morgan, Elaine and Stephen Davies, Red Sea pilot: Aden to Cyprus, 2nd edn,
Huntingdon: Imray, 2002.
Morgan, J. R., ‘Make-believe and make believe: the fictionality of the Greek novels’,
in Christopher Gill and T. P. Wiseman (eds.), Lies and fiction in the ancient
world, Austin: University of Texas Press, 1994, pp. 175-229.
Morrison, Kathleen D., ‘Sources, approaches, definitions’, in Susan E. Alcock
et al. (eds.), Empires, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001, pp. 1-9.
Most, Glenn W., ‘The stranger’s strategem ’,///5 109 (1989), 114-33.

Bibliography

343

Most, Glenn W. (ed.), Collecting fragments — Fragmente sammeln, Gottingen: VanRuprecht, 1997.
denhoeck

&

Muller, Klaus E., Geschichte der antiken Ethnographic und ethnographischen Theoriebildung, 2 vols., Wiesbaden: Steiner, 1972-80.

Mund-Dopchie, Monique, ‘L’invention de l’lnde merveilleuse.
l’imaginaire et decouverte de
(eds.), Inde,

1 ’

Structures de

Autre lointain’, in Jean-Claude Carriere et al.

Grece ancienne (1995), pp. 99-112.

Murphy, E. M., and J. P. Mallory, ‘Herodotus and the cannibals’, Antiquity 74.284
(2000), 388-94.

Murphy, Trevor, Pliny the Elder’s Natural history: the empire in the encyclopedia
Oxford University Press, 2004.
Murray, Oswyn, ‘Herodotus and Hellenistic culture’, CQ 22 (1972), 200—13.

,

Murray, Oswyn (ed.), Sympotica: a symposium on the symposium, Oxford: Clarendon, 1990.
Musti, Domenico, ‘Syria and the East’, in CAH, 2nd edn (1984), vol. VII. 1, pp. 175220.

Narain, A. K., The Indo-Greeks, Oxford: Clarendon, 1957.

‘The Greeks of Bactria and India’, CAH, 2nd edn (1989), vol. VIII. 2, pp. 388-421.
Neiman, David, ‘Ethiopia and Kush: Biblical and ancient Greek geography’,
Ancient World 3 (1980), 35—42.
Nesselrath, Heinz-Giinther, ‘Herodot

und die Enden der Erde’, Museum Hel-

veticum 52 (1995), 20-44.

Neugebauer, O., The exact sciences in antiquity, 2nd edn, Providence: Brown University Press, 1957.

ANRW

II. 9.1 (1978), 46-69.
Neusner, Jacob, ‘The Jews east of the Euphrates’,
Nicolet, Claude, The world ofthe citizen in Republican Rome, tr. P. S. Falla, Berkeley:

University of California Press, 1980.
Space, geography, and politics in the early Roman empire, Ann Arbor: University

of Michigan Press, 1991.
Nigg, Joe, The book offabulous beasts: a treasury of writings from ancient times to the
present

,

Oxford University Press, 1999.

Nixon, C. E. V., and Barbara Saylor Rodgers, In praise of later Roman emperors,
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.
Noy, David, Foreigners and Rome: citizens and strangers, London: Duckworth, 2000.
Ober, Josiah, ‘Tiberius and the political testament of Augustus’, Historia 31 (1982),
306-28.

Mass and elite: rhetoric, ideology and the power ofthe people, Princeton University
Press, 1989.
Ogilvie, R. M., and Sir Ian Richmond (eds.), Cornelii Taciti De Vita Agricolae,

Oxford: Clarendon, 1967.
Olmstead, A. T., History of the Persian empire. University of Chicago

Press,

1948.

Onfray, Michel, Cynismes. Portrait du philosophe en chien, Paris: Grasset, 1990.
Orrieux, Claude, ‘La “parente” entre Juifs et Spartiates’, in Raoul Lonis (ed.),
L’Etranger dans le monde grec, Nancy: Presses Universitaires, 1988, pp. 169-91.

Bibliography

344

Otto, August, Die Sprichworter undsprichwortlichen Redensarten derRomer, Leipzig:

Teubner, 1890.
Pagden, Anthony, The fall of natural man: the American Indian and the origins of
comparative ethnology Cambridge University Press, 1982.
,

Empires and peoples: Europeans and the rest of the world, from antiquity to the
present

,

London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2001.

Palmer, J. A. B., ‘Periplus Maris Erythraei: the Indian evidence as to the date’,

CQ

41 (1947). 137-40.

Park, Lorraine, and Katherine Daston, Wonders and the order of nature, 1150—
1750

New York: Zone, 1998.
Parker, A. J., Ancient shipwrecks of the Mediterranean and the Roman provinces,

Oxford: Tempus reparatum, 1992.
Parker, Grant, ‘Porous connections: the Mediterranean and the Red Sea’, Thesis

Eleven 67 (2001), 59—79.

Paschoud, Francis, Roma Aeterna. Etudes sur le patriotisme romain dans I'occident
latin 4 Tepoque des grandes invasions, Rome: Institut suisse, 1967.

Pearson, Lionel, The lost histories of Alexander the Great,
Philological Association, i960.

New York: American

Pedech, Paul, Historiens compagnons dAlexandre, Paris: Belles Lettres, 1984.
Perry, Ben Edwin,

The ancient romances, Berkeley: University of California Press,

1967.
Pettinato, Giovanni, Semiramide, Milan: Rusconi, 1985.

Petzke, G.,

The Traditionen iiber Apollonius von Tyana und das Neue Testament,

Leiden: Brill, 1970.
Philip, J. A., Pythagoras and early Pythagoreanism, University of Toronto Press,

1966.

Photiades, Penelope, ‘Les diatribes cyniques du papyrus de Geneve 271, leurs tra-

ductions et elaborations successives’, Museum Helveticum 16 (1959), 116-39.
Pierce, R. H., ‘A sale of an Alodian slave girl: a reexamination of Papyrus Strassburg
Inv. 1404’, Symbolae Osloenses 70 (1995), 159-64.
Pigulewskaja, N„ Byzanz aufden Wegen nach Indien, Berlin: Akademie, 1969.

Placido,

Domingo, ‘L’image d’ Alexandre dans la conception plutarcheenne de

l’empire Romain’, Dialogues d’histoire ancienne 21 (1995), 131-38.
Pollet, Gilbert (ed.), India and the ancient world: history, trade and culture before ad
6$o, Leuven: Peeters, 1987.

Possehl, Gregory L., Indus age: the beginnings, Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl-

vania Press, 1999.
Potter,

David S., ‘Odor and power in the Roman empire’, in J. I. Porter (ed.),

Constructions of the classical body, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press,

I999> PP- 169-89.
Potter, D. S., Prophets and Emperors, Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press,

1994.
Priaulx, Osmund de Beauvoir, ‘The Indian travels of Apollonius of Tyana ’, Journal

of the Royal Asiatic Society 17 (i860), 70-105.
The liar school ofHerodotus, Amsterdam: Gieben, 1993.

Pritchett, W. Kendrick,

,

Bibliography

345

Purcell, Nicholas, ‘Maps, lists, money, order and power’, JRS 80 (1990), 178-82.

‘The city of Rome’, in Richard Jenkyns (ed.)

,

The legacy ofRome: a new appraisal

Oxford: Clarendon, 1992, pp. 421-53.

‘The city of Rome and the plebs urbana in the late Republic’, CAH, 2dn edn
(1994), vol. IX, pp. 644-88.
‘Eating fish: the paradoxes of seafood’, in John Wilkins et al. (eds.)

,

Food in

antiquity, University of Exeter Press, 1995, pp. 132-49.

‘Rome and its development under Augustus and his successors’, CAH, 2nd edn
(1996), vol. X, pp. 782-811.
Rajak, Tessa, ‘Dying for the law: the martyrs portrait in Jewish-Greek literature’, in

M. J. Edwards and Simon Swain (eds.), Portraits: biographical representation
in the Greek and Latin literature of the Roman empire, Oxford: Clarendon,
1997. PP- 39-68.

Raman, Shankar, Framing ‘India

’:

the colonial imaginary in early modern culture,

Stanford University Press, 2002.

Raschke, Manfred G., ‘New studies in Roman commerce with the east’,
II. 9. 2

ANRW

(1978), 604-1378.

Rawson, Elizabeth, The Spartan tradition in European thought, Oxford: Clarendon,
1969.

Ray, Himanshu P. (ed.), Archaeology ofseafaring: the Indian Ocean in the ancient
period, Delhi: Pragati, 1999.

The archaeology of seafaring in ancient South Asia, Cambridge University Press,
2003.

Reade, Julian (ed.), The Indian Ocean in antiquity, London: Kegan Paul, 1996.
Reardon, Bryan P„ The form of Greek romance, Princeton University Press, 1991.

The Red Sea pilot, London: Hydrographic Office, 1873.
Reese, Wilhelm, Die griechischen Nachrichten iiber Indien, Leipzig: Teubner, 1914.
Reitzenstein, R., Hellenistische Wundererzablungen, Leipzig: Teubner, 1906.

Renou, Louis (ed.), La Geographie de Ptolemee, L’Inde (VII, 1—4), Paris: Champion,
T 9 2 5-

Reynolds, L. D. (ed.), Texts and transmission, Oxford: Clarendon, 1983.
Reynolds, L. D., and N. G. Wilson (eds.), Scribes and scholars: a guide to the
transmission of Greek and Latin literature, 3rd edn, Oxford: Clarendon, 1991.
Rhys Davids, T. W. (tr.), The questions ofKing Milinda, 2 vols., Oxford: Clarendon,

1890-4.
Rice, Michael, Search for the Paradise Island, London: Longman, 1984.

The archaeology of the Arabian Gulf, c. yooo-323 sc, London: Routledge, 1994.
Richardson, L. J., Jr, A new topographical dictionary of ancient Rome, Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992.
Riese, Alexander (ed.), Geographi Latini Minores, Heilbronn: Henning, 1878.

Robb, Peter (ed.), The concept of race in South Asia, Oxford University Press,
r

99S-

Robert, L., ‘De Delphes 4 l’Oxus. Inscriptions grecques nouvelles de la Bactriana’,

Comptes rendus de lAcademie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres (1968), 416-57 =
Opera minora selecta 5, Amsterdam: Hakkert, 1989, 510—51.

Bibliography

346

Roberts, Colin H., and T. C. Skeat, The birth of the codex, London: British

Academy, 1983.
Roberts, Deborah H., Frances M. Dunn and Don P. Fowler (eds.), Classical closure:
reading the end in Greek and Latin literature, Princeton University Press,
1997.

Robinson, T. R., ‘Alexander and the Ganges: the text of Diodorus 18.6.2’, Ancient
History Bulletin 7 (1993), 84-99.
Rodewald, Cosmo, Money in the age of Tiberius, Manchester University Press,
1976.

de Romanis, Federico, Cassia, cinnamomo, ossidiana. Uomini e merci tra Oceano
indiano e Mediterraneo, Rome: Bretschneider, 1996.
‘Graffiti greci da Wadi Menih el-Fler.

Un Vestorius tra Coptos e Berenice’, Topoi

6 (1996), 731-45de Romanis, F. and A. Tchernia (eds.), Crossings: early Mediterranean contact with
India, Delhi: Manohar, 1997.

Romm, James S., ‘Aristotle’s elephant and the myth ofAlexander’s scientific patronage’, American Journal ofPhilology no (1989), 566-75.
The edges of the earth in ancient thought, Princeton University Press, 1992.

Romm, James S., ‘Dog heads and noble savages: Cynicism before the Cynics?’ in
Branham and Goulet-Caze (eds.), The Cynics, 1996, pp. 121—35.
Rosenmeyer, Patricia A., Ancient epistolary fictions: the letter in Greek literature,
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Ross, D. J. A., Alexander historiatus: a guide to medieval illustrated Alexander literature, Frankfurt

am Main: Lang, 1988.

Rostovtseff, M., Caravan cities, Oxford University Press, 1932.
Russell, D. A., Greek declamation, Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Russell,

D. A., and N. G. Wilson (eds.), Menander Rhetor, Oxford: Clarendon,

1981.

Sachau, Edward C., Alberuni’s India, Delhi: D. K. Publications, 1910.
Sacks, Kenneth S., Diodorus Siculus and thefirst century, Princeton University Press,

1990.
Sahai, B., Iconography of minor Hindu and Buddhist deities, Delhi: Abhinav, 1975.

New York: Vintage, 1995 with new afterword [1978].
Beginnings: intention and method, 2nd edn, New York: Basic, 1997.

Said, Edward, Orientalism,

de Ste Croix, G. E. M., The class struggle in the ancient Greek world, London:

Duckworth, 1981.
Salisbury, Joyce E.,

Jennifer

‘Human beasts and bestial humans in the Middle Ages’, in

Ham and Matthew Senior (eds.), Animal acts: configuring the human

in western history, London: Routledge, 1997, pp. 9-22.
Salles, Jean-Franfois, ‘The Arab-Persian Gulf under the Seleucids’, in Amelie Kuhrt

and Susan Sherwin-White (eds.), Hellenism in the East, Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1987, pp. 75-108.
Sallmann, K. G., Die Geographic des dlteren Plinius in ihrem Verhdltnis zu Varro,
Berlin: De Gruyter, 1971.

6

,

Bibliography

347

Salway, Benet, ‘Travel, itineraria and tabellaria'

in Adams and Laurence (eds.).

Travel and geography, 2001, pp. 22 -66.
Santelia, Stefania (ed. and comm.), Charition liberata (P. Oxy. 413), Bari: Levante,
1991.

Santirocco, Matthew S., ‘Horace and Augustan ideology’, Arethusa 28 (1995), 225-

43

-

Schachermeyr, Fritz, ‘Alexander und die Ganges-Lander’, Innsbrucker Beitrdge zur
Kulturgeschichte 3 (1955), 123-35.

Scheid, John, ‘The priest’, in Andrea Giardina (ed.), The Romans, University of

Chicago Press, 1993, pp. 55-84.
Scheidel, Walter, and Sitta von Reden (eds.), The ancient economy, London: Routledge, 2002.

Schepens, Guido, L'Autopsie’ dans la methode des historiens grecs du Ve siecle avant
J.-C., Brussels:

AWLSK, 1980.

‘Jacoby’s FGrHist: problems, methods, prospects’, in Most (ed.), Collectingfrag-

ments, 1997, pp. 144-72.

Schepens, Guido, and Kris Delcroix, Ancient paradoxography: origin, evolution,

production and reception’, in Oronzo Pecere and Antonio Stramaglia (eds.),

La letteratura di consumo nel mondo Greco-latino, Cassino: University degli
Studi di Cassino, 1996, pp. 373—460.
H., ‘Das Persische Golf als Schiffahrts- und Seehandelsroute in
Achamenidischer Zeit und in der Zeit Alexanders des Grossen’, Bonner

Schiwek,

Jahrbiicher 162 (1962), 4—97.
Schlumberger, Daniel, L’Orient hellenise. LArt grec et ses heritiers dans TAsie non

mediterraneenne, Paris: Michel, 1970.

Schlumberger, Daniel, Louise Robert, Andre Dupont-Sommer and Emile Benveniste

,

‘Une bilingue greco-aramtene d’ Asoka’ Journal Asiatique 24
,

(1958),

1-48.

Schmidt, Erich F., Persepolis, 3 vols., Chicago: Oriental Institute, 1953-70.
Schmidt, Francis, ‘Naissance d’une geographic juive’, in Desreumaux and Schmidt
(eds.), Moise Geographe, 1988, pp. 13—30.

Schmitt, Rudiger, ‘Ctesias’, in Encyclopaedia Iranica, ed. Ehsan Yarshatar, 1993,
vol. VI, pp. 441-6.

Schmitthenner, W. ‘Rome and India: aspects of universal history during the Principate’,//?S 69 (1979), 90-106.

Schneider, Pierre, L Ethiopie et L Inde. Interference et confusions aux extremites du

monde antique (VIII‘ siecle J.-C.— VI'’ siecle apres J.-C.), Rome: MEFRA,
2004.
Schneider, Rolf Michael, Bunte Barbaren: Orientalenstatuen aus farbigem Marmor
in der romischen Reprdsentationskunst, Worms: Werner, 1986.

‘Die Faszination des Feindes: Bilder der Parther und des Orients in Rom’, in
Josef Wiesehofer (ed.), Das Partherreich, 1998, pp. 95-146.
Schoff, Wilfred (ed.), The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea: travel and trade in the

Indian Ocean, New York: Longmans, 1912.

Bibliography

34&

Schofield, Malcolm, Saving the city: philosopher-kings and other classical paradigms,

London: Roudedge, 1999.
Schon, Franz, ‘Fluss’, in Holger Sonnabend (ed.), Mensch und Landschaft in der
Antike. Lexikon der historischen Geographic Stuttgart: Metzler, 1999,
pp. 145—
,

50.

Schwarz, F. F., ‘Kosmas und Sielediba’, Ziva Antika 25 (1975), 469—90.

‘Magna India Pliniana’, Wiener Studien (1995), 439-65.
Scott, Joan W., ‘Experience’, in Judith Butler and Joan W. Scott (eds.), Feminists
theorize the political, New York: Roudedge, 1992,
pp. 71—96.
The elephant in the Greek and Roman world, Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, and London: Thames and Hudson, 1974.

Scullard, FI. H.,

Seager, Robin, ‘Some imperial virtues in the Latin prose panegyrics: the demands

of propaganda and the dynamics of literary composition’, Proceedings of the
Liverpool Latin Seminar 4 (1983), 129-66.

Mary, and Ursula Sharma (eds.), Contextualising caste: postDumontian perspectives, Oxford: Clarendon, 1994.

Searle-Chatterjee,

Sedlar, Jean W., India and the Greek world: a study in the transmission

of culture,

Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1980.
Seibert,

Jakob, Alexander der Grosse,

Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchge-

sellschaft, 1972.

Seldeslachts, Erik, ‘Translated loans and loan translations as evidence of Graeco-

Indian bilingualism in antiquity’, L'Antiquite classique 67 (1998), 273-99.

Sevcenko, I.,

A shadow outline of virtue: the classical heritage of Greek Christian

literature

,

in K. Weitzmann (ed.), The age ofspirituality, Princeton University

Press, 1980, pp. 53-73.

Shabazi, A. Sh., ‘Darius Haft Kisvar’, in Heidemarie Koch and D. N. Mackenzie
(eds.), Kunst,

Kultur und Geschichte der Acheimenidenzeit und ihr Fortleben,

ed., DAI(T) Ergbd. 10, Berlin: Reimer, 1983, pp. 239-46.
Shaw, Brent D., ‘The elder Pliny’s African geography’, Historia 30 (1981), 424-71.

“‘Eaters of flesh and drinkers of milk”: the ancient Mediterranean ideology of

the pastoral nomad’, Ancient Society 13—14 (1982-3), 5—31.
‘Rebels and outsiders’, CAH, 2nd edn, (2000), vol. XI,
pp. 361-403.
Sherk, Robert K. (ed.), The Roman empire: Augustus to Fladrian, Cambridge University Press, 1988.

Sherwin- White, Susan, and Amelie Kuhrt, From Samarkhand to Sardis; a new
approach to the Seleucid empire, London: Duckworth, 1993.

Sidebotham, Steven E., Roman economic policy in the Erythra Thalassa, 30 bc—ad
217, Leiden: Brill, 1986.

Sidebotham, S. E., and W. Z. Wendrich (eds.), Berenike 1994: preliminary report

of the 1994 excavations at Berenike (Egyptian Red Sea coast), Leiden: CNWS,
1995

-

Sinnatamby, J. R., Sri Lanka in Ptolemy’s Geography, Colombo: n.p., 1968.
Smith, Morton, Jesus the magician, San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1978.
Smith, Vincent A., ‘The Indian travels of Apollonius of Tyana’, Zeitschrift der
deutschen morgenlandischen Gesellschaft 68 (1914), 329—44.

Bibliography

349

The early history of India from 600 bc to the Muhammadan conquest 4th edn,
Oxford: Clarendon, 1957.
Snowden, Frank M., Jr, Blacks in antiquity: Ethiopians in the Greco-Roman experi,

ence, Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press, 1970.

“Blacks” and the Afrocentrists’, in Mary R. Lefkowitz and Guy
MacLean Rogers (eds.). Black Athena revisited, Chapel Hill: University of

‘Bernal’s

North Carolina Press, 1996, pp. 112-28.
Spence, Jonathan D., The Chan’s great continent: China in western minds. New
York: Norton, 1998.

Spencer, Diana, The Roman Alexander: reading a cultural myth, University of Exeter
Press, 2002.

Stadter, Philip A., Arrian ofNicomedia, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1980.

Stanford, W. B., The Ulysses theme: a study in the adaptability ofa traditional hero,

2nd edn, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1968.
Steinby, Eva Margareta (ed.), Lexicon Topographicum Urbis Romae, 6 vols., Rome:

Quasar, 1993-2000.
Stern, E. Marianne, ‘Early Roman glass from Heis on the north Somali coast’, in

Annales du ioe Congres de I’Association pour I’Histoire du Verre, Amsterdam:

AHIV, 1985, pp. 23-36.
‘Early Roman export glass in India’, in Begley and De Puma (eds.), Rome and
India, 1991, pp. 113-24.

‘The glass from Heis’, in J. Desanges, E. M. Stern and P. Ballet (eds.), Sur les
routes antiques de TAzanie et de TInde. Le Fonds Revoil du Musee de I’Homme

(Heis et Damo, en Somalie), Paris: MAI, 1993, pp. 21—61.
Stoianovitch, Traian, French historical method: the Annales paradigm, Ithaca: Cornell

University Press, 1976.

Stoneman, Richard, Legends ofAlexander the Great, London: Everyman, 1994.

‘Who are the Brahmans? Indian lore and Cynic doctrine in Palladius’ de hragmanihus and its models’, CQ 44 (1994), 500-10.
‘Naked philosophers: the Brahmans in the Alexander historians and the Alexander Romance’ JHS 115 (1995), 115-29.
‘The legacy of Alexander in ancient philosophy’, in Joseph Roisman (ed.), Brill’s
companion to Alexander the Great, Leiden: Brill, 2003, pp. 325-45.
Strong, D. E., Greek and Roman gold and silver plate, London: Methuen, 1966.
Stroumsa, Guy, Barbarian philosophy: the religious revolution of early Christianity
Tubingen: Mohr Siebeck, 1999.
,

‘Kolumbus und die antiken Wissenschaften’, Archiv fur
Kulturgeschichte 69 (1987), 331-40.
‘Ptolemy and the problem of scientific perception of space’, in Talbert and

Stiickelberger, Alfred,

Broderson (eds.), Space in the Roman world, 2004, pp. 27—40.
Swain, Joseph Ward, ‘The theory of the four monarchies’, Cl. Phil. 35 (1940), 1— 21.
Swain, Simon, Hellenism and empire: language, classicism and power in the Greek
world, ad 50—250, Oxford: Clarendon, 1996.
Syme, Ronald, The Roman revolution, Oxford: Clarendon, 1939.

35 °

Bibliography

Anatolica: studies in Strabo Oxford: Clarendon, 1995.
,

Szegedy-Maszak, Andrew, ‘Legends of the Greek lawgivers’, Greek, Roman and
Byzantine Studies 19 (1978), 199-211.
Tabacco, Raffaella (ed.), Itinerarium Alexandri. Testo, apparato critico, introduzione,
traduzione e commento, Citta di Castello: Olschki, 2000.
Talbert, RichardJ. A. (ed.), Barrington atlas ofthe Greek and Roman world, Princeton

University Press, 2000.

‘Cartography and taste in Peutinger’s Roman map’, in Talbert and Brodersen
(eds.), Space in the Roman world, 2004, pp. 113 41.
—
‘Rome’s provinces as framework for world-view’, in L. de Ligt, E. A. Hemel-

rijk

and H. W. Singor (eds.), Roman rule and civic life: local and regional

perspectives. Impact of Empire, vol. IV. Amsterdam: Gieben, 2004,
pp. 21-37.
Talbert Richard, and Kai Brodersen (eds.), Space in the Roman world: its perception

and presentation Munster: Lit, 2004.
Tarn, W. W., The Greeks in Bactria and India, 3rd edn, rev. by F. L. Holt and
M. C. J. Miller, Chicago: Ares, 1997.
,

Tatum, James (ed.), The search for the ancient novel, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1994.
Teltscher, Kate, India inscribed: European and British writing on India, 1600—1800,

Oxford University Press, 1995.
Thapar, Romila, ‘Asokan India and the Gupta age’, in A. L. Basham (ed.),A cultural
history ofIndia, Oxford University Press, 1975,
pp. 38—51.
‘Society and historical consciousness: the Itihasa-Purana tradition’, in Sabyasachi

Bhattacharya and Romila Thapar (eds.), Situating Indian history: for Sarvapalli
Gopal, Oxford University Press, 1986, pp. 353-83.

A history ofIndia, 2nd edn, London: Penguin, 1990, vol.

I.

Asoka and the decline of the Mauryas, rev. edn, Oxford University Press, 1997.
Cultural pasts: essays in early Indian history, Oxford University Press, 2000.
Early India: from the origins to ad 1300, Berkeley: University of California Press,

2002.
Thiel, J. H., Eudoxus of Cyzicus: a chapter in the history ofthe sea-route to India and
the route around the Cape in ancient times, Groningen: Wolters, 1967.

Thomas, Navakatesh J., Die syrisch-orthodoxe Kirche der siidindischen ThomasChristen, Wurzburg: Augustinus, 1967.
Thomas, Richard F., Lands and peoples in Roman poetry: the ethnographic tradition,
Cambridge: Cambridge Philological Society, 1982.
Thomas, Rosalind, Herodotus in context: ethnography, science, and the art ofpersuasion, Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Thompson, LVArcy Wentworth, A glossary ofGreek birds, Oxford: Clarendon, 1895.
Thompson, Lloyd A., Romans and blacks, London: Routledge, 1989.
Thompson, Stith, Motif index offolk-literature, 6vols., Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1955—8.

Thomson, J. Oliver, History ofancientgeography, Cambridge University Press, 1948.
Thundy, Zacharias P., Buddha and Christ: nativity stories and Indian traditions,
Leiden: Brill, 1993.

Bibliography

351

Thurn, Nikolaus, ‘Der Aufbau der Exemplasammlung des Valerius Maximus’,
Hermes 129 (2001), 79-94.

Timmer, Barbara Catherina Jacoba, Megasthenes en de Indische maatschappij,
Amsterdam: H. J. Paris, 1930.
Tissot, Y. ‘L’encratisme des Acts de Thomas’,

ANRW

II. 25

(1988), 1415—30.

Todorov, Tzvetan, On human diversity: nationalism, racism and exoticism in French
thought,

tr.

Catherine Porter, Cambridge,

MA: Harvard University Press,

1993.

The conquest ofAmerica: the question ofthe other tr. Richard Howard, New York:
,

Harper and Row, 1997.
‘Making Roman-ness and the Aeneid

Toll, Katharine,

’,

Classical Antiquity 16

(i997). 34-56.

Toynbee, J. M. C., The Hadrianic school: a chapter in the history of Greek art,

Cambridge University Press, 1934.
Trautmann, Thomas R., Kautilya and the Arthasastra; a statistical investigation of
the authorship and evolution of the text, Leiden: Brill, 1971.

‘Elephants and the Mauryas’, in S. N. Mukherjee (ed.), India: history and thought:
essays in honor ofA. L.

Basham, Calcutta: Subarnarekha, 1982, pp. 254-81.

Aryans and British India, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1997.
Treu, U. ‘The Greek Physiologus’, in Hillard et al. (eds.), Ancient history in a

modem university, 1998, vol. II, pp. 426—32.
Trudinger, Karl, Studien zur Geschichte der griechisch-romischen Ethnographic, Basel:
Birkhauser, 1911.

Tuan, Yi-Fu, Space and place: the perspective ofexperience, Minneapolis: University

of Minnesota Press, 1977.
Tulving, Endel, ‘Episodic and semantic memory’, in Endel Tulving and Wayne

Donaldson (eds.), The organization of memory, New York: Academic Press,
1972, pp. 381-403.
Tuplin, Christopher, ‘Darius’ Suez canal and Persian imperialism’, Achaemenid

History Workshop 6 (1991), 237—81.

Turner, Paula J., Roman coins from India, London: Royal Numismatic Society,
1989.

Turner, P. J., and J. E. Cribb, ‘Numismatic evidence for the Roman trade with
ancient India’, in Julian Reade (ed.), The Indian Ocean in antiquity, London:

Kegan Paul, 1996, pp. 309—20.
Vasaly, Ann, Representations: images of the earth in Ciceronian oratory, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1993.

Vasunia, Phiroze, The gift ofthe Nile: Hellenizing Egyptfrom Aeschylus to Alexander,
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001.

‘Hellenism and empire: reading Edward Said’, Parallax 9 (2003), 88-97.
Vernant, Jean-Pierre, ‘Ambiguity and reversal: on the enigmatic structure of Oedipus
Rex’ in Jean-Pierre Vernant and Pierre Vidal-Naquet (eds.), Myth and tragedy
in ancient Greece, tr. Janet Lloyd,

New York: Zone, 1988, pp. 113—40.

Myth and society in ancient Greece, tr. Janet Lloyd, New York: Zone, 1990.

35 2

Bibliography

Versluys, M. J., Aegyptiaca Romana: Nilotic scenes and the Roman views of Egypt,

Leiden: Brill, 2002.

Vidal-Naquet, Pierre, ‘Flavius Arrien entre deux mondes’, in Pierre Savinel (tr.),
Arrien, Histoire dAlexandre, Paris: Minuit, 1984.

Vogelsang, Willem, ‘The Achaemenids and India’, Achaemenid History Workshop

4 (1990), 93-no.
Vogt, Josef, ‘Herodot in Agypten’, in Walter Marg (ed.), Herodot. Eine Auswahl aus
der neueren Forschung, Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1962
[1929], pp. 412-33.

Walbank, F. W., A historical commentary on Polybius, Oxford: Clarendon, 1957, vol.
I.

Walbank, Frank, ‘A Greek looks at Rome: Polybius VI revisited’, Scripta Classica
Israelica 17 (1998), 45-59.
Wallace-Hadrill, Andrew, ‘The elder Pliny and man’s unnatural history’, Greece

and Rome 37 (1990), 80-96.
Houses and society in Pompeii and Herculaneum, Princeton University Press, 1994.
Warmington, E. H., The commerce between the Roman empire and India, 2nd edn,

New York: Octagon, 1974.
Weerakkody, D. P. M., Taprobane: ancient Sri Lanka as known to Greeks and Romans,
Turnhout: Brepols, 1997.
Wehrli, Fritz (ed.), Die Schule des Aristoteles II. Aristoxenos, 2nd edn, Basel: Schwabe,
1967.

Weitzmann, Kurt, ‘The classical in Byzantine art as a mode of individual expression’, in Byzantine Art, an [sic] European Art: lectures, n.e., Athens: Department
of Antiquities, 1966, pp. 148-77.
Studies in classical and Byzantine manuscript illumination, ed.

H. L. Kessler,

University of Chicago Press, 1971.

Welsby, Derek A., The kingdom of Kush: the Napatan and Meroitic Empires,
Princeton: Markus Wiener, 1998.
Wendrich, W. Z., R. S. Tomber, S. E. Sidebotham, J. A. Harrell, R. T.
Cappers
J.

and R. S. Bagnall, ‘Berenike crossroads: the integration of information’, Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient 46.1 (2003) 46-87.
West, M. L., Early Greek philosophy and the Orient Oxford: Clarendon, 1971.
,

East ofHelicon: westAsiatic elements in Greek poetry and myth, Oxford: Clarendon,
1997-

West, Stephanie, ‘Herodotus’ portrait of Hecataeus’,///5’ in (1991), 144-60.

Westrem, Scott D., The Hereford map: a transcription ofthe legends with commentary,
Turnhout: Brepols, 2001.
Wheeler, R. E. M., Rome beyond the imperialfrontiers, Harmondsworth: Penguin,
1954-

Whitcomb, Donald, ‘Quseir al-Qadim and the location of Myos Hormos’, Topoi
6 (1996), 747-72.
White, Peter, Promised verse: poets in the society ofAugustan Rome, Cambridge, MA:

Harvard University Press, 1993.

Bibliography

353

White, T. H., The book of beasts, being a translation from a Latin bestiary of the
twelfth century London: Cape, 1954.
,

WTiitmarsh, Tim, Greek literature and the Roman empire: the politics of imitation,

Oxford University Press, 2001.
Whittaker, C. R., Frontiers of the Roman empire: a socio-economic study, Baltimore:

Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994.
‘“To reach out to India and pursue the dawn”: the Roman view of India’, Studies
in History 14.1 (1998), 1-20.

Rome and its frontiers: the dynamics ofempire, Routledge: London, 2004.
Wiedemann, Thomas, Greek and Roman slavery, London: Routledge, 1981.
Wiesehofer, Josef (ed.), Das Partherreich und seine Zeugnisse. The Arsacid Empire:
sources and documentation. Beitrdge des internationalen Colloquiums, Eutin
(2y.-y0.Juni 1996), Stuttgart: Steiner, 1998.

Wilcken, Ulrich, ‘Punt-Fahrten in der Ptolemaerzeit’, Zeitschrift fur dgyptische
Sprache und Altertumskunde 60 (1925), 86-102.

Wilken, Robert L., The land called holy: Palestine in Christian history and thought,
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992.
Will, E., Les Palmyreniens. Venise des sables, Paris: Colin, 1992.
Will, W., and J. Heinrichs (eds.), Zu Alexander dem Grossen. Festschrift G. Wirth,

2 vols., Amsterdam: Hakkert, 1988.

Wolfgang (ed.), Alexander der Grosse. Eine Welteroberung und ihr HinVortrage des Internationalen Bonner Alexanderkolloquiums, 19.Bonn: Habelt, 1998.
Williams, Gordon, Tradition and originality in Roman poetry, Oxford: Clarendon,

Will,

tergrund.

21. 12.1996,

1968.
Willis, William H., and Klaus Maresch,

‘The encounter of Alexander with the

Brahmans’, Zeitschrift fur Papyrologie und Epigrafik 74 (1988), 59-83.
Wilson, N. G., Scholars ofByzantium, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1983.

From Byzantium to Italy: Greek studies in the Italian Renaissance, Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1992.
Wimbush, Vincent L., and Richard Valantasis (eds.), Asceticism, Oxford: Clarendon, 1995.

Wink, Andre, ‘From the Mediterranean to the Indian Ocean: medieval history
in geographic perspective’, Comparative Studies in Society and History 44.3
(2002), 416-45.

Wirzubski, Chaim, Libertas as a political idea at Rome during the late Republic and
early Principate, Cambridge University Press, 1950.

Wittkower, Rudolf, ‘Marvels of the East: a study in the history of monsters Journal

of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 6 (1943), 159-97.
Wolf, Eric R., Europe and the people without history, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982.

Wolska, Wanda, La Topographie chretienne de Cosmos Indicopleustes: theologie et
science au

VP siecle, Paris: Presses Universitaires, 1962.

Bibliography

354

Wolska-Conus, Wanda (ed.), Cosmos Indicopleustes, Topographie chretienne, pref.

by Paul Lemerle, 3 vols., Paris: du Cerf, 1968-73.
Wolska-Conus, Wanda, ‘Geographic’, RAC vol. X (1978), cols. 155-222.

Woodcock, George, The Greeks in India, London: Faber, 1966.

Woodman, A. J., Rhetoric in classical historiography, London: Croom Helm, 1988.
Woodward, David, ‘Medieval Mappaemundi’ in Harley and Woodward (eds.),
,

History of cartography, 1987, vol. I, pp. 286-370.
Woolf, Greg, ‘Monumental writing and the expansion of Roman society in the
early empire’, JRS 86 (1996), 22-39.

Woolner, A. C., Asoka: text and glossary, Oxford University Press, 1924.
Yavetz, Zvi, ‘The Res Gestae and Augustus’ public image’, in Caesar Augustus: seven
aspects, Oxford: Clarendon, 1984, pp. 1—36.
Young, Gary K., Rome’s eastern trade: international commerce and imperial policy,

31 bc—ad 305, London: Routledge, 2001.
Young, T. Cuyler, Jr, ‘The consolidation of the empire and its limits and growth

under Darius and Xerxes’, CAH, 2nd edn, vol. IV (1988), pp. 53-m.
Yii, Ying-shih, Trade

and expansion in Han China, Berkeley: University of California

Press, 1967.

Zambrini, Andrea, ‘Gli Indika di Megastenef Annali di Scuola Normale di Pisa 12
(1982), 71-149 and 15 (1985), 781-853.
Zanker, Paul, Power of images in the age ofAugustus, tr. Alan Shapiro, Ann Arbor:

University of Michigan Press, 1988.
The mask ofSocrates: the image ofthe intellectual in antiquity, Berkeley: University

of California Press, 1995.
Pompeii: public andprivate life, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998.
Zeitlin, Froma I., ‘Visions and revisions of Homer’, in Simon Goldhill (ed.), Being

Greek under Rome: cultural identity, the Second Sophistic and the development

ofEmpire, Cambridge University Press, 2001, pp. 195-266.
Zelzer, Klaus, Die alten lateinischen Thomasakten. Texte und Untersuchungen zur

Geschichte der altchristlichen Literatur 122, Berlin: Akademie, 1977.

Index

Achaemenid empire 4, 169, 308

Cassius Dio 221

Aelian 19, 33, 78, 106, 134, 159

Chaldaeans 252, 266, 270, 276, 297, 302

Aelius Aristides 112, 288

Chandragupta 42, 107, 309
Christianity 123, 209-40, 286-8, 297-301,

Aelius Gallus 179

310

Agrippa 216-17, 2I 9> 2 44
Alexander 2, 3, 7, 33-42, 83, 190, 192-3, 204, 210,

Cicero 90, 210

222-7, 2 4 8 ~9> 2.64, 278-85, 293, 309, 311,

cirrus knot 128, 158

316

Clearchus of Soli 266, 267, 268

Alexander Romance 223, 225, 283

Clement of Alexandria 252-3, 270, 287

Alexandria 52, 149, 150, 180, 258, 287

coins 177-8, 185

Ammianus Marcellinus 276

Constantine 227, 241

Annius Plocamus 174, 194

Constantius I 241

antiquity (of India) 47

Cosmas Indicopleustes 77, 104, 135-40, 142, 172,
236-40, 245, 311

aphorism 261
Apollonius of Tyana 1-6, 288-94

Curtius Rufus 71, 92, 112, 154, 311

Apuleius 276

Ctesias 28-33, 58

Arabia 28, 169, 208

Cynics 39, 262, 283, 286-8

Arikamedu 175
Aristotle 16, 41, 154, 159, 258, 266

Darius 1 13, 14, 21, 57, 211

Aristoxenus 257, 287, 301

Diodorus 44, 71, 206, 274

Arrian 34, 38, 71, 275, 276, 286

Dionysus 19, 37, 47, 76, 81, 82, 83-6, 230, 242,

Artemidorus of Ephesus 245

246, 252, 293

triumph of 125

Augustine 228, 229, 277

Augustus (Octavian) 5, 206, 207, 210-16, 219-21,

Dio Chrysostom 106

246
Aurelius Gaius 248

Egypt, Egyptians 20, 21, 48, 111, 157, 208, 231,

autopsy 27, 31, 42, 60, 78, 104-5, n 5> 2 39>

285, 303
elephant 127, 131, 159-60

309

Axum 182, 279

Ephorus 51
Eratosthenes 52-3, 72, 74

Bacchus, see Dionysus

Ethiopia 24, 25, 51, 54, 55, 62, 75, 81, 93, 109, hi,
125, 141, 158, 231, 238, 241, 270

Bactrians 48, 223, 267

Eudoxus 193

Barberini ivory 128

Bartholomew 298-9
bematists 52

fabrics 156-7

Bengal, Bay of 190

fragments 58, 69, 113-16, 198, 314

Berenike 174, 176, 179

Buddha, Buddhism 50, 51, 118, 135, 252, 277, 300

Ganges 36, 37, 45, 49, 72, 73, 75, 95, 190, 203,

Calanus 39, 40, 89, 267, 268, 276-80, 281

gender 90

cannibalism 24-5, 106

Genesis 233-6

279, 290, 295

355

5

)

Index

356
gold 21-3, 27, 185

Onesicritus 39, 280

Gymnosophists 6, 75, 143, 272-88

origins 83-6

Orosius 229—32

Hecataeus 18-21, 98

Ovid 214
Oxyrhynchus papyrus 81, 106, 194

Hellanicus 31
Heracles 19, 37, 43, 47, 50, 83-6, 242,

Palladius 278-86

293

Hereford map ( mappamundi 228, 233, 250

Palmyra 181

Herodotus 21-8, 30, 63, 70, 72, 198, 255
Hippalus 193

Pantaenus 299

historiography, evolution of 30, 32

Parthia and Parthians 50, 143, 182, 214, 221-3,

Homer 106-7, H 1 2 ^3

Paradise, earthly 232

300, 317

*

Horace 213
Hydaspes (river) 38

Pataliputra 42, 43, 55, 71

Hydaspes (slave name) 157
Hyphasis (Beas) 35, 38, 290, 293

Periplus of the Erythraean Sea 2, 74, 100, 116, 158,

pepper 151-2, 153, 165, 168
160, 172, 175, 180, 182, 192, 197
Persepolis

Iambulus 71, no, 193

Persia, Persians, see Achaemenid empire, Parthia,

India personified 131 —

Sassanian empire

Indian Ocean 81, 141, 183, 197, 230

Petronius 168

Isidore of Charax 181

Peutinger map 220, 225, 245, 246, 315

Isidore of Seville 80, 123, 227, 232-3

Philo 277
Philostratus 1, 17, 107, 259, 283, 288-94, 310

Jerome 155, 235, 252

Piazza Armerina 131, 161, 246

Jews 48, 225, 232-6, 265-7
Josephus 235, 236

Pliny 78, 80, 83, 92, 96, 97, 100-3, 113-16, 118,
119, 183, 192, 198, 203, 218-19, 2 44> 246, 275,

Jubilees, Book of 234

310

Julian 224, 288

Plutarch 40, 160, 263, 277, 282

Justinian 149

Polybius 70, 209, 217

populousness 86

Kolhapur bronzes 176

Porus 34, 204, 290

language 18, 29, 41, 63, 291

provinces, Roman 140

Libya (Africa) 24, 36, 44, 45, hi, 125, 127, 132,

Ptolemy, Claudius 74, 118, 172, 190, 237, 245,

Propertius 90, 170, 211-13

140, 141, 161, 163

310

Longus 81

Pyrrho 264

Lucian 30, 222, 269, 284, 288

Pythagoras 260, 263, 291

luxury 165-71, 184-9, I9 2 198, 201, 312
>

Quseir al-Qadim 174

Mandanis (Dandamis) 39, 279-81, 284, 301
maps 20, 64, 74-6, 80, 125, 189-98, 201, 244-6,
314

martikhora 32, 122

race 25, 93-4
religion 25
rivers 45, 95, 140, 234

marvel 26, 36, 45, 56, 69, 95, 103, 117, 119, 122-5,
140, 238, 240, 308

Said, Edward 8, 196, 200, 208, 317

Megasthenes 42, 57, 72, 107, 273,

Sassanian empire 223, 224, 300

309
Mela, Pomponius 73, 99, 218

sati 90, 252

Menander (Milinda) 50
monsoon 74, 193-4
Muziris papyrus 173, 186

Scylax of Caryanda 14-18, 27, 122
Scythia, Scythians 51, 54, 112, 210, 225, 232

Seneca 70, 224
silk 156, 170-1

slaves, slavery 88-9, 157-8

nature (Natura) 78, 79, 96

social divisions 46, 87, 272-8

Nearchus 35, 38, 72, 104, 293

Socrates 203, 257, 262, 301

Nonnus 76

Sopatrus 137

Index
Sophists 257

Theodosius 242

spices 150-70

Thomas 2, 195, 301, 310

Statius 147

Timosthenes 52

statuette, ivory 163, 199

Trajan 3, 72, 217, 221—2, 224, 297, 309

Stephanus of Byzantium 18
stones, precious 154-6

utopia 107-10

Strabo 16, 51, 72, 107, hi, 113— 15, 116, 119, 180,
190, 218-19, 246, 3 IO > 3*7

Tacitus, Germania 70, 109, 117

Virgil 208

Xenophon of Ephesus 80, no

Taprobane 75, 77, 92, 238, 240
Tertullian 277

Yavanas 173, 195

357

